For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Systems Engineering
Handbook

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

SYSTEMS ENGINEERING
HANDBOOK
A GUIDE FOR SYSTEM LIFE CYCLE
PROCESSES AND ACTIVITIES
FOURTH EDITION
INCOSE-TP-2003-002-04
2015
Prepared by:
International Council on Systems Engineering (INCOSE)
7670 Opportunity Rd, Suite 220
San Diego, CA, USA 92111‐2222
Compiled and Edited by:
David D. Walden, ESEP
Garry J. Roedler, ESEP
Kevin J. Forsberg, ESEP
R. Douglas Hamelin
Thomas M. Shortell, CSEP

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Copyright © 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey
Published simultaneously in Canada
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without
either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per‐copy fee to the Copyright Clearance
Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750‐8400, fax (978) 750‐4470, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to
the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030,
(201) 748‐6011, fax (201) 748‐6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in preparing this book, they make no
representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied
warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales
materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where
appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to
special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact our Customer Care Department within the
United States at (800) 762‐2974, outside the United States at (317) 572‐3993 or fax (317) 572‐4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be available in electronic formats.
For more information about Wiley products, visit our web site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging‐in‐Publication Data:
Systems engineering handbook : a guide for system life cycle processes and activities / prepared by International Council on Systems
Engineering (INCOSE) ; compiled and edited by, David D. Walden, ESEP, Garry J. Roedler, ESEP, Kevin J. Forsberg, ESEP,
R. Douglas Hamelin, Thomas M. Shortell, CSEP. – 4th edition.
  pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-118-99940-0 (cloth)
1. Systems engineering–Handbooks, manuals, etc. 2. Product life cycle–Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Walden, David D., editor.
II. Roedler, Garry J., editor. III. Forsberg, Kevin, editor. IV. Hamelin, R. Douglas, editor. V. Shortell, Thomas M., editor.
VI. International Council on Systems Engineering.
TA168.S8724 2015
620.001′1–dc23
2014039630
ISBN: 9781118999400
Set in 10/12pt Times LT Std by SPi Publisher Services, pondicherry, India
Printed in the United States of America
10

9

1

2015

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

contentS

Incose Notices

vii

History of Changes

viii

3

Generic Life Cycle Stages

25
25
26
27
32

List of Figures

x

List of Tables

xii

3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5

1	Systems Engineering Handbook Scope

1

3.6

Prefaceix

1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5

Purpose
Application
Contents
Format
Definitions of Frequently Used Terms

2	Systems Engineering Overview
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7

1
1
1
3
4
5

Introduction
5
Definitions and Concepts of a System
5
The Hierarchy within a System
7
Definition of Systems of Systems
8
Enabling Systems
10
Definition of Systems Engineering
11
Origins and Evolution of
Systems Engineering
12
2.8 Use and Value of Systems Engineering
13
2.9 Systems Science and Systems Thinking
17
2.10 Systems Engineering Leadership
21
2.11	Systems Engineering Professional
Development22

4

Introduction
Life Cycle Characteristics
Life Cycle Stages
Life Cycle Approaches
What Is Best for Your Organization,
Project, or Team?
Introduction to Case Studies

Technical Processes

36
39
47

4.1

Business or Mission Analysis
Process49
4.2 Stakeholder Needs and Requirements
Definition Process
52
4.3 System Requirements Definition
Process57
4.4 Architecture Definition
Process64
4.5 Design Definition Process
70
4.6 System Analysis Process
74
4.7 Implementation Process
77
4.8 Integration Process
79
4.9 Verification Process
83
4.10 Transition Process
88
4.11 Validation Process
89
4.12 Operation Process
95
4.13 Maintenance Process
97
4.14 Disposal Process
101
v

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

vi

5

contentS

Technical Management Processes

104

5.1 Project Planning Process
104
5.2 Project Assessment and Control
Process108
5.3 Decision Management Process
110
5.4 Risk Management Process
114
5.5 Configuration Management Process
122
5.6 Information Management Process
128
5.7 Measurement Process
130
5.8 Quality Assurance Process
135

9.4
9.5
9.6
9.7
9.8
9.9

Object‐Oriented Systems
Engineering Method
193
Prototyping
197
Interface Management
197
Integrated Product and Process
Development199
Lean Systems Engineering
203
Agile Systems Engineering
207

10	Specialty Engineering Activities

211

10.1
6

Agreement Processes

139

6.1 Acquisition Process
6.2 Supply Process

140
142

7	Organizational Project‐Enabling Processes 145

8

7.1 Life Cycle Model Management Process
7.2 Infrastructure Management Process	
7.3 Portfolio Management Process
7.4 Human Resource Management Process
7.5 Quality Management Process
7.6 Knowledge Management Process

145
149
151
154
156
158

Tailoring process and Application
of Systems Engineering

162

8.1 Tailoring Process
8.2 Tailoring for Specific Product Sector
or Domain Application
8.3 Application of Systems Engineering
for Product Line Management
8.4 Application of Systems Engineering
for Services
8.5 Application of Systems Engineering
for Enterprises
8.6 Application of Systems Engineering
for Very Small and Micro Enterprises

163
165
170
171
175
179

9	Cross‐Cutting Systems Engineering
Methods180
9.1 Modeling and Simulation
180
9.2 Model‐Based Systems Engineering
189
9.3 Functions‐Based Systems Engineering
Method190

Affordability/Cost‐Effectiveness/
Life Cycle Cost Analysis
211
10.2 Electromagnetic Compatibility
219
10.3 Environmental Engineering/Impact
Analysis220
10.4 Interoperability Analysis
221
10.5 Logistics Engineering
222
10.6 Manufacturing and Producibility
Analysis225
10.7 Mass Properties Engineering
225
10.8 Reliability, Availability,
and Maintainability226
10.9 Resilience Engineering
229
10.10 System Safety Engineering
231
10.11 System Security Engineering
234
10.12 Training Needs Analysis
237
10.13	Usability Analysis/Human Systems
Integration237
10.14 Value Engineering
241
Appendix A: References

246

Appendix B: Acronyms

257

Appendix C: Terms and Definitions

261

Appendix D: N2 Diagram of Systems
Engineering Processes

267

Appendix E: Input/Output Descriptions

269

Appendix F: Acknowledgements

284

Appendix G: Comment Form

286

Index287

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

INCOSE Notices

This International Council on Systems Engineering
(INCOSE) Technical Product was prepared by the
INCOSE Knowledge Management working group. It is
approved by INCOSE Technical Operations Leadership
for release as an INCOSE Technical Product.
Copyright ©2015 by INCOSE, subject to the following restrictions:
Author Use: Authors have full rights to use their contributions unfettered, with credit to the INCOSE
technical source, except as noted in the following text.
Abstraction is permitted with credit to the source.
INCOSE Use: Permission to reproduce and use this
document or parts thereof by members of INCOSE and to
prepare derivative works from this document for INCOSE
use is granted, with attribution to INCOSE and the
original author(s) where practical, provided this copyright notice is included with all reproductions and
derivative works. Content from ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288 and
ISO/IEC TR 24748‐1 is used by permission, and is not to
be reproduced other than as part of this total document.
External Use: This document may not be shared or
distributed to any non‐INCOSE third party. Requests for
permission to reproduce this document in whole or in

part, or to prepare derivative works of this document for
external and/or commercial use, will be denied unless
covered by other formal agreements with INCOSE.
Copying, scanning, retyping, or any other form of
reproduction or use of the content of whole pages or
source documents are prohibited, except as approved by
the INCOSE Administrative Office, 7670 Opportunity
Road, Suite 220, San Diego, CA 92111‐2222, USA.
Electronic Version Use: All electronic versions (e.g.,
eBook, PDF) of this document are to be used for personal
professional use only and are not to be placed on non‐
INCOSE sponsored servers for general use. Any additional use of these materials must have written approval
from the INCOSE Administrative Office.
General Citation Guidelines: References to this handbook should be formatted as follows, with appropriate
adjustments for formally recognized styles:
INCOSE (2015). Systems Engineering Handbook:
A Guide for System Life Cycle Process and Activities
(4th ed.). D. D. Walden, G. J. Roedler, K. J. Forsberg,
R. D. Hamelin, and, T. M. Shortell (Eds.). San Diego,
CA: International Council on Systems Engineering.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

vii

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

History of Changes

Revision

Revision date

Change description and rationale

Original

Jun 1994

1.0

Jan 1998

2.0

Jul 2000

2.0A

Jun 2004

3.0

Jun 2006

3.1

Aug 2007

3.2

Jan 2010

3.2.1

Jan 2011

3.2.2
4.0

Oct 2011
Jan 2015

Draft Systems Engineering Handbook (SEH) created by INCOSE members from
several defense/aerospace companies—including Lockheed, TRW, Northrop Grumman,
Ford Aerospace, and the Center for Systems Management—for INCOSE review
Initial SEH release approved to update and broaden coverage of SE process. Included
broad participation of INCOSE members as authors. Based on Interim Standards EIA
632 and IEEE 1220
Expanded coverage on several topics, such as functional analysis. This version was
the basis for the development of the Certified Systems Engineering Professional
(CSEP) exam
Reduced page count of SEH v2 by 25% and reduced the US DoD‐centric material
wherever possible. This version was the basis for the first publically offered CSEP
exam
Significant revision based on ISO/IEC 15288:2002. The intent was to create a country‐
and domain‐neutral handbook. Significantly reduced the page count, with elaboration to
be provided in appendices posted online in the INCOSE Product Asset Library (IPAL)
Added detail that was not included in SEH v3, mainly in new appendices. This version
was the basis for the updated CSEP exam
Updated version based on ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288:2008. Significant restructuring of the
handbook to consolidate related topics
Clarified definition material, architectural frameworks, concept of operations
references, risk references, and editorial corrections based on ISO/IEC review
Correction of errata introduced by revision 3.2.1
Significant revision based on ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288:2015, inputs from the relevant
INCOSE working groups (WGs), and to be consistent with the Guide to the Systems
Engineering Body of Knowledge (SEBoK)

viii

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Preface

The objective of the International Council on Systems
Engineering (INCOSE) Systems Engineering Handbook
(SEH) is to describe key process activities performed by
systems engineers. The intended audience is the systems
engineering (SE) professional. When the term systems
engineer is used in this handbook, it includes the new sys­
tems engineer, a product engineer or an engineer in another
discipline who needs to perform SE, or an experienced
systems engineer who needs a convenient reference.
The descriptions in this handbook show what each SE
process activity entails, in the context of designing for
required performance and life cycle considerations. On
some projects, a given activity may be performed very
informally; on other projects, it may be performed very
formally, with interim products under formal configuration
control. This document is not intended to advocate any
level of formality as necessary or appropriate in all situa­
tions. The appropriate degree of formality in the execution
of any SE process activity is determined by the following:
1. The need for communication of what is being done
(across members of a project team, across organi­
zations, or over time to support future activities)
2. The level of uncertainty
3. The degree of complexity
4. The consequences to human welfare
On smaller projects, where the span of required commu­
nications is small (few people and short project life
cycle) and the cost of rework is low, SE activities can be

conducted very informally and thus at low cost. On larger
projects, where the span of required communications is
large (many teams that may span multiple geographic
locations and organizations and long project life cycle)
and the cost of failure or rework is high, increased for­
mality can significantly help in achieving project oppor­
tunities and in mitigating project risk.
In a project environment, work necessary to accom­
plish project objectives is considered “in scope”; all
other work is considered “out of scope.” On every
project, “thinking” is always “in scope.” Thoughtful tai­
loring and intelligent application of the SE processes
described in this handbook are essential to achieve the
proper balance between the risk of missing project
technical and business objectives on the one hand and
process paralysis on the other hand. Chapter 8 provides
tailoring guidelines to help achieve that balance.
Approved for SEH v4:
Kevin Forsberg, ESEP, Chair, INCOSE Knowledge Manage­
ment Working Group
Garry Roedler, ESEP, Co‐Chair, INCOSE Knowledge Manage­
ment Working Group
William Miller, INCOSE Technical Director (2013–2014)
Paul Schreinemakers, INCOSE Technical Director (2015–2016)
Quoc Do, INCOSE Associate Director for Technical Review
Kenneth Zemrowski, ESEP, INCOSE Assistant Director for
Technical Information
ix

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

List of Figures

1.1. System life cycle processes per ISO/IEC/IEEE
15288
1.2. Sample of IPO diagram for SE processes
2.1. Hierarchy within a system
2.2. Example of the systems and systems of systems
within a transport system of systems
2.3. System of interest, its operational environment,
and its enabling systems
2.4. Committed life cycle cost against time
2.5. Technology acceleration over the past 140 years
2.6. Project performance versus SE capability
2.7. Cost and schedule overruns correlated with SE
effort
2.8. Systems science in context
2.9. SE optimization system
2.10. Professional development system
3.1. Generic business life cycle
3.2. Life cycle model with some of the possible
progressions
3.3. Comparisons of life cycle models
3.4. Importance of the concept stage
3.5. Iteration and recursion
3.6. Vee model
3.7. Left side of the Vee model
3.8. Right side of the Vee model
3.9. IID and evolutionary development
3.10. The incremental commitment spiral model
(ICSM)
3.11. Phased view of the generic incremental commitment spiral model process

4.1. Transformation of needs into requirements
4.2. IPO diagram for business or mission analysis
process
4.3. Key SE interactions
4.4. IPO diagram for stakeholder needs and requirements definition process
4.5. IPO diagram for the system requirements
definition process
4.6. IPO diagram for the architecture definition process
4.7. Interface representation
4.8. (a) Initial arrangement of aggregates; (b) final
arrangement after reorganization
4.9. IPO diagram for the design definition process
4.10. IPO diagram for the system analysis process
4.11. IPO diagram for the implementation process
4.12. IPO diagram for the integration process
4.13. IPO diagram for the verification process
4.14. Definition and usage of a verification action
4.15. Verification level per level
4.16. IPO diagram for the transition process
4.17. IPO diagram for the validation process
4.18. Definition and usage of a validation action
4.19. Validation level per level
4.20. IPO diagram for the operation process
4.21. IPO diagram for the maintenance process
4.22. IPO diagram for the disposal process
5.1. IPO diagram for the project planning process
5.2. IPO diagram for the project assessment and
control process
5.3. IPO diagram for the decision management process

x

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

LIST OF FIGURES

5.4. IPO diagram for the risk management process
5.5. Level of risk depends on both likelihood and
consequences
5.6. Typical relationship among the risk categories
5.7. Intelligent management of risks and opportunities
5.8. IPO diagram for the configuration management
process
5.9. Requirements changes are inevitable
5.10. IPO diagram for the information management
process
5.11. IPO diagram for the measurement process
5.12. Measurement as a feedback control system
5.13. Relationship of technical measures
5.14. TPM monitoring
5.15. IPO diagram for the quality assurance process
6.1. IPO diagram for the acquisition process
6.2. IPO diagram for the supply process
7.1. IPO diagram for the life cycle model management
process
7.2. Standard SE process flow
7.3. IPO diagram for the infrastructure management
process
7.4. IPO diagram for the portfolio management
7.5. IPO diagram for the human resource management
process
7.6. IPO diagram for the quality management process
7.7. IPO diagram for the knowledge management
process
8.1. Tailoring requires balance between risk and process
8.2. IPO diagram for the tailoring process
8.3. Product line viewpoints
8.4. Capitalization and reuse in a product line

xi

8.5.
8.6.
8.7.

Product line return on investment
Service system conceptual framework
Organizations manage resources to create
enterprise value
8.8. Individual competence leads to organizational,
system and operational capability
8.9. Enterprise SE process areas in the context of the
entire enterprise
9.1. Sample model taxonomy
9.2. SysML diagram types
9.3. Functional analysis/allocation process
9.4. Alternative functional decomposition evaluation
and definition
9.5. OOSEM builds on established SE foundations
9.6. OOSEM activities in context of the system
development process
9.7. OOSEM activities and modeling artifacts
9.8. Sample FFBD and N2 diagram
9.9. Examples of complementary integration
activities of IPDTs
9.10. Lean development principles
10.1. Contextual nature of the affordability trade space
10.2. Systems operational effectiveness
10.3. Cost versus performance
10.4. Affordability cost analysis framework
10.5. Life cycle cost elements (not to scale)
10.6. Process for achieving EMC
10.7. Supportability analysis
10.8. Reliability program plan development
10.9. Resilience event model
10.10. Sample Function Analysis System Technique
(FAST) diagram

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

List of Tables

2.1.
2.2.
2.3.
2.4.
3.1.

Important dates in the origins of SE as a discipline
Important dates in the origin of SE standards
Current significant SE standards and guides
SE return on investment
Generic life cycle stages, their purposes, and
decision gate options
4.1. Examples of systems elements and physical
interfaces

5.1. Partial list of decision situations (opportunities)
throughout the life cycle
8.1. Standardization‐related associations and
­automotive standards
8.2. Attributes of system entities
9.1. Types of IPDTs and their focus and
­responsibilities
9.2. Pitfalls of using IPDT

xii

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

1
Systems Engineering Handbook Scope

1.1

Purpose

This handbook defines the discipline and practice of
­systems engineering (SE) for students and practicing
professionals alike and provides an authoritative reference to understand the SE discipline in terms of content
and practice.
1.2

Application

This handbook is consistent with ISO/IEC/IEEE
15288:2015, Systems and software engineering—System
life cycle processes (hereafter referred to as ISO/IEC/
IEEE 15288), to ensure its usefulness across a wide
range of application domains—man‐made systems and
products, as well as business and services.
ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288 is an international standard that
provides generic top‐level process descriptions and
requirements, whereas this handbook further elaborates
on the practices and activities necessary to execute the
processes. Before applying this handbook in a given
organization or project, it is recommended that the tailoring guidelines in Chapter 8 be used to remove conflicts with existing policies, procedures, and standards

already in use within an organization. Processes and
activities in this handbook do not supersede any international, national, or local laws or regulations.
This handbook is also consistent with the Guide to the
Systems Engineering Body of Knowledge (SEBoK,
2014) (hereafter referred to as the SEBoK) to the extent
practicable. In many places, this handbook points readers
to the SEBoK for more detailed coverage of the related
topics, including a current and vetted set of references.
For organizations that do not follow the principles of
ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288 or the SEBoK to specify their
life cycle processes (including much of commercial
industry), this handbook can serve as a reference to practices and methods that have proven beneficial to the SE
community at large and that can add significant value in
new domains, if appropriately selected and applied.
Section 8.2 provides top‐level guidance on the application of SE in selected product sectors and domains.
1.3

Contents

This chapter defines the purpose and scope of this handbook. Chapter 2 provides an overview of the goals and
value of using SE throughout the system life cycle.

INCOSE Systems Engineering Handbook: A Guide for System Life Cycle Processes and Activities, Fourth Edition.
Edited by David D. Walden, Garry J. Roedler, Kevin J. Forsberg, R. Douglas Hamelin and Thomas M. Shortell.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

1

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

2

Systems Engineering Handbook Scope

Chapter 3 describes an informative life cycle model with
six stages: concept, development, production, utilization,
support, and retirement.
ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288 identifies four process groups
to support SE. Each of these process groups is the ­subject
of an individual chapter. A graphical overview of these
processes is given in Figure 1.1:
•• Technical processes (Chapter 4) include business or
mission analysis, stakeholder needs and requirements definition, system requirements definition,
architecture definition, design definition, system
analysis, implementation, integration, verification,
transition, validation, operation, maintenance, and
disposal.
•• Technical management processes (Chapter 5)
include project planning, project assessment and
control, decision management, risk management,

configuration management, information management,
measurement, and quality assurance.
•• Agreement processes (Chapter 6) include acquisition
and supply.
•• Organizational project‐enabling processes (Chapter 7)
include life cycle model management, infrastructure management, portfolio management, human
resource management, quality management, and
knowledge management.
This handbook provides additional chapters beyond the
process groups listed in Figure 1.1:
•• Tailoring processes and application of systems
engineering (Chapter 8) include information on
how to adapt and scale the SE processes and how to
apply those processes in various applications. Not
every process will apply universally. Careful selection

Technical
management
processes

Agreement
processes

Integration process

Project planning
process

Acquisition process

Verification process

Project assessment
and control process

Supply process

Transition process

Decision
management
process

Architecture
definition process

Validation process

Risk management
process

Design definition
process

Operation process

System analysis
process

Maintenance
process

Implementation
process

Disposal process

Technical
processes
Business or mission
analysis process
Stakeholder needs &
requirements
definition process
System
requirements
definition process

Configuration
management
process
Information
management
process

Organizational
project-enabling
processes
Life cycle model
management
process
Infrastructure
management
process
Portfolio
management
process
Human resource
management
process
Quality management
process
Knowledge
management
process

Measurement
process
Quality assurance
process

Figure 1.1 System life cycle processes per ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288. This figure is excerpted from ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288:2015,
Figure 4 on page 17, with permission from the ANSI on behalf of the ISO. © ISO 2015. All rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Format

from the material is recommended. Reliance on
process over progress will not deliver a system.
•• Crosscutting systems engineering methods (Chapter 9)
provide insights into methods that can apply across
all processes, reflecting various aspects of the iterative and recursive nature of SE.
•• Specialty engineering activities (Chapter 10)
include practical information so systems engineers
can understand and appreciate the importance of
various specialty engineering topics.
Appendix A contains a list of references used in this
handbook. Appendices B and C provide a list of acronyms and a glossary of SE terms and definitions, respectively. Appendix D provides an N2 diagram of the SE
processes showing where dependencies exist in the form

3

of shared inputs or outputs. Appendix E provides a master
list of all inputs/outputs identified for each SE process.
Appendix F acknowledges the various contributors to
this handbook. Errors, omissions, and other suggestions
for this handbook can be submitted to the INCOSE using
the comment form contained in Appendix G.

1.4 Format
A common format has been applied in Chapters
4 through 7 to describe the system life cycle processes
found in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288. Each process is illustrated by an input–process–output (IPO) diagram showing key inputs, process activities, and resulting outputs.
A sample is shown in Figure 1.2. Note that the IPO

Controls
• Applicable laws and
regulations
• Standards
• Agreements
• Project direction
• Project control requests

Inputs
• Data
• Material

Activities
Process
A process is an integrated set
of activities that transforms
inputs into desired outputs

Outputs
• Processed data
• Products and/or services

Enablers
• Organization policies,
procedures, and standards
• Organization infrastructure
• Project infrastructure
• Knowledge management
system
Figure 1.2 Sample of IPO diagram for SE processes. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and Walden. Usage per
the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

4

Systems Engineering Handbook Scope

diagrams throughout this handbook represent “a” way
that the SE processes can be performed, but not necessarily “the” way that they must be performed. The issue
is that SE processes produce “results” that are often captured in “documents” rather than producing “documents”
simply because they are identified as outputs. To understand a given process, readers are encouraged to study
the complete information provided in the combination of
diagrams and text and not rely solely on the diagrams.
The following heading structure provides consistency
in the discussion of these processes:
•• Process overview
•• Purpose
•• Description
•• Inputs/outputs
•• Process activities
•• Process elaboration
To ensure consistency with ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288, the
purpose statements from the standard are included verbatim for each process described herein. Inputs and outputs are listed by name within the respective IPO
diagrams with which they are associated. A complete list
of all inputs and outputs with their respective descriptions appears in Appendix E.
The titles of the process activities listed in each section
are also consistent with ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288. In some
cases, additional items have been included to provide
summary‐level information regarding industry best practices and evolutions in the application of SE processes.

The controls and enablers shown in Figure 1.2 govern
all processes described herein and, as such, are not
repeated in the IPO diagrams or in the list of inputs associated with each process description. Typically, IPO diagrams do not include controls and enablers, but since
they are not repeated in the IPO diagrams throughout the
rest of the handbook, we have chosen to label them IPO
diagrams. Descriptions of each control and enabler are
provided in Appendix E.
1.5 Definitions of Frequently
Used Terms
One of the systems engineer’s first and most important
responsibilities on a project is to establish nomenclature
and terminology that support clear, unambiguous communication and definition of the system and its elements, functions, operations, and associated processes.
Further, to promote the advancement of the field of SE
throughout the world, it is essential that common definitions and understandings be established regarding
­general methods and terminology that in turn support
common processes. As more systems engineers accept
and use common terminology, SE will experience
improvements in communications, understanding, and,
ultimately, productivity.
The glossary of terms used throughout this book (see
Appendix C) is based on the definitions found in ISO/
IEC/IEEE 15288; ISO/IEC/IEEE 24765, Systems and
Software Engineering—Vocabulary (2010); and SE
VOCAB (2013).

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

2
Systems Engineering Overview

2.1

Introduction

This chapter offers a brief overview of the systems
­engineering (SE) discipline, beginning with a few key
­definitions, an abbreviated survey of the origins of the
­discipline, and discussions on the value of applying SE.
Other concepts, such as systems science, systems thinking,
SE leadership, SE ethics, and professional development,
are also introduced.
2.2 Definitions and Concepts
of a System
While the concepts of a system can generally be traced
back to early Western philosophy and later to science,
the concept most familiar to systems engineers is often
traced to Ludwig von Bertalanffy (1950, 1968) in which
a system is regarded as a “whole” consisting of interact­
ing “parts.” The ISO/IEC/IEEE definitions provided in
this handbook draw from this concept.
2.2.1

General System Concepts

The systems considered in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288 and in
this handbook

[5.2.1] … are man‐made, created and utilized to provide
products or services in defined environments for the
benefit of users and other stakeholders.

The definitions cited here and in Appendix C refer to
systems in the real world. A system concept should be
regarded as a shared “mental representation” of the
actual system. The systems engineer must continually
distinguish between systems in the real world and system
representations. The INCOSE and ISO/IEC/IEEE defini­
tions draw from this view of a system:
… an integrated set of elements, subsystems, or assem­
blies that accomplish a defined objective. These elements
include products (hardware, software, firmware), processes,
people, information, techniques, facilities, services, and
other support elements. (INCOSE)
[4.1.46] … combination of interacting elements orga­
nized to achieve one or more stated purposes. (ISO/IEC/
IEEE 15288)

Thus, the usage of terminology throughout this hand­
book is clearly an elaboration of the fundamental idea
that a system is a purposeful whole that consists of inter­
acting parts.

INCOSE Systems Engineering Handbook: A Guide for System Life Cycle Processes and Activities, Fourth Edition.
Edited by David D. Walden, Garry J. Roedler, Kevin J. Forsberg, R. Douglas Hamelin and Thomas M. Shortell.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

5

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

6

Systems Engineering Overview

An external view of a system must introduce elements
that specifically do not belong to the system but do
interact with the system. This collection of elements is
called the operating environment or context and can
include the users (or operators) of the system.
The internal and external views of a system give rise
to the concept of a system boundary. In practice, the
system boundary is a “line of demarcation” between
the system itself and its greater context (to include the
operating environment). It defines what belongs to the
system and what does not. The system boundary is not to
be confused with the subset of elements that interact
with the environment.
The functionality of a system is typically expressed in
terms of the interactions of the system with its operating
environment, especially the users. When a system is con­
sidered as an integrated combination of interacting ele­
ments, the functionality of the system derives not just
from the interactions of individual elements with the
environmental elements but also from how these interac­
tions are influenced by the organization (interrelations)
of the system elements. This leads to the concept of
system architecture, which ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010 (2011)
defines as
the fundamental concepts or properties of a system in its
environment embodied in its elements, relationships,
and in the principles of its design and evolution.

This definition speaks to both the internal and external
views of the system and shares the concepts from the
definitions of a system.

of an aircraft is its air speed. Attributes are represented
symbolically by variables. Specifically, a variable is a
symbol or name that identifies an attribute. Every vari­
able has a domain, which could be but is not necessarily
measurable. A measurement is the outcome of a process
in which the system of interest (SOI) interacts with an
observation system under specified conditions. The out­
come of a measurement is the assignment of a value to a
variable. A system is in a state when the values assigned
to its attributes remain constant or steady for a mean­
ingful period of time (Kaposi and Myers, 2001). In SE
and software engineering, the system elements (e.g.,
­software objects) have processes (e.g., operations) in
addition to attributes. These have the binary logical
values of being either idle or executing. A complete
description of a system state therefore requires values to
be assigned to both attributes and processes. Dynamic
behavior of a system is the time evolution of the system
state. Emergent behavior is a behavior of the system that
cannot be understood exclusively in terms of the behavior
of the individual system elements.
The key concept used for problem solving is the black
box/white box system representation. The black box rep­
resentation is based on an external view of the system
(attributes). The white box representation is based on an
internal view of the system (attributes and structure of the
elements). There must also be an understanding of the
relationship between the two. A system, then, is repre­
sented by the (external) attributes of the system, its
internal attributes and structure, and the interrelationships
between these that are governed by the laws of science.
2.2.3 General Systems Methodologies

2.2.2 Scientific Terminology Related
to System Concepts
In general, engineering can be regarded as the practice
of creating and sustaining services, systems, devices,
machines, structures, processes, and products to improve
the quality of life—getting things done effectively and
efficiently. The repeatability of experiments demanded
by science is critical for delivering practical engineering
solutions that have commercial value. Engineering in
general and SE in particular draw heavily from the termi­
nology and concepts of science.
An attribute of a system (or system element) is an
observable characteristic or property of the system (or
system element). For example, among the various attributes

Early pioneers of SE and software engineering, such as
Yourdon (1989) and Wymore (1993), long sought to bring
discipline and precision to the understanding and
management of the dynamic behavior of a system by
seeking relations between the external and internal repre­
sentations of the system. Simply stated, they believed that
if the flow of dynamic behavior (the system state evolu­
tion) could be mapped coherently into the flow of states
of the constituent elements of the system, then emergent
behaviors could be better understood and managed.
Klir (1991) complemented the concepts of a system
in engineering and science with a general systems meth­
odology. He regarded problem solving in general to rest
upon a principle of alternatively using abstraction and

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

The Hierarchy within a System

interpretation to solve a problem. He considered that his
methodology could be used both for system inquiry
(i.e., the representation of an aspect of reality) and for
system definition (i.e., the representation of purposeful
man‐made objects).
2.3

7

the response to this challenge will be domain specific.
A system element that needs only a black box represen­
tation (external view) to capture its requirements and
confidently specify its real‐world solution definition can
be regarded as atomic. Decisions to make, buy, or reuse
the element can be made with confidence without further
specification of the element. This leads to the concept of
hierarchy within a system.
One approach to defining the elements of a system
and their interrelations is to identify a complete set of
distinct system elements with regard only to their rela­
tion to the whole (system) by suppressing details of
their interactions and interrelations. This is referred to
as a partitioning of the system. Each element can be
either atomic or it can be a much higher level that could
be viewed as a system itself. At any given level, the ele­
ments are grouped into distinct subsets of elements
­subordinated to a higher level system, as illustrated in
Figure 2.1. Thus, hierarchy within a system is an orga­
nizational representation of system structure using a
partitioning relation.

The Hierarchy within a System

In the ISO/IEC/IEEE usage of terminology, the system
elements can be atomic (i.e., not further decomposed),
or they can be systems on their own merit (i.e., decom­
posed into further subordinate system elements). The
integration of the system elements must establish the
relationship between the effects that organizing the
­elements has on their interactions and how these effects
enable the system to achieve its purpose.
One of the challenges of system definition is to under­
stand what level of detail is necessary to define each
system element and the interrelations between elements.
Because the SOIs are in the real world, this means that

System

System
element

System
element

System
composed of
interacting system elements

System
element

System-ofinterest

System
System

System
System
System
element
Make, buy,
or reuse

System
element

System
System

System
System

System
element

System
element

System
element

System
element
System
element

System
element

System
element

System
System

System
System

System
element

System
element

System
element

System
element

System
System
System
element

System
element

Figure 2.1 Hierarchy within a system. This figure is adapted from ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288:2015, Figure 1 on page 11 and
Figure 2 on page 12, with permission from the ANSI on behalf of the ISO. © ISO 2015. All rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

8

Systems Engineering Overview

The concept of a system hierarchy described in ISO/
IEC/IEEE 15288 is as follows:
[5.2.2] The system life cycle processes … are described
in relation to a system that is composed of a set of inter­
acting system elements, each of which can be imple­
mented to fulfill its respective specified requirements.

The art of defining a hierarchy within a system relies
on the ability of the systems engineer to strike a balance
between clearly and simply defining span of control
and resolving the structure of the SOI into a complete
set of system elements that can be implemented with
confidence. Urwick (1956) suggests that a possible
heuristic is for each level in the hierarchy to have no
more than 7 ± 2 elements subordinate to it. Others have
also found this heuristic to be useful (Miller, 1956).
A level of design with too few subordinate elements
is unlikely to have a distinct design activity. In this
case, both design and verification activities may con­
tain redundancy. In practice, the nomenclature and
depth of the hierarchy can and should be adjusted to fit
the complexity of the system and the community of
interest.

2.4

A “system of systems” (SoS) is an SOI whose elements
are managerially and/or operationally independent sys­
tems. These interoperating and/or integrated collections
of constituent systems usually produce results unachiev­
able by the individual systems alone. Because an SoS is
itself a system, the systems engineer may choose whether
to address it as either a system or as an SoS, depending
on which perspective is better suited to a particular
problem.
The following characteristics can be useful when
deciding if a particular SOI can better be understood as
an SoS (Maier, 1998):
•• Operational independence of constituent systems
•• Managerial independence of constituent systems
•• Geographical distribution
•• Emergent behavior
•• Evolutionary development processes
Figure 2.2 illustrates the concept of an SoS. The air
transport system is an SoS comprising multiple aircraft,

Transport
system

Air transport system

Air traffic
control system

Ticketing
system

Fuel
distribution
system

Airport
system
Aircraft
system

Definition of Systems of Systems

Ground
transport
system

Maritime
transport
system

Figure 2.2 Example of the systems and systems of systems within a transport system of systems. Reprinted with permission
from Judith Dahmann. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Definition of Systems of Systems

airports, air traffic control systems, and ticketing systems,
which along with other systems such as security and
financial systems facilitate passenger transportation.
There are equivalent ground and maritime transportation
SoS that are all in turn part of the overall transport system
(an SoS in the terms of this description).
The SoS usually exhibits complex behaviors, often
created by the existence of the aforementioned Maier’s
characteristics. “Complexity” is essentially different
from “complicated.” In complicated systems, such as an
automobile, the interactions between the many parts are
governed by fixed relationships. This allows reasonably
reliable prediction of technical, time, and cost issues. In
complex systems, such as the air transport system, inter­
actions between the parts exhibit self‐organization,
where local interactions give rise to novel, nonlocal,
emergent patterns. Complicated systems can often
become complex when the behaviors change, but even
systems of very few parts can sometimes exhibit sur­
prising complexity.
The best way to understand a complicated system is
to break it down into parts recursively until the parts are
so simple that we understand them and then to reas­
semble the parts to understand the whole. However, this
approach does not help us to understand a complex
system, because the emergent properties that we really
care about disappear when we examine the parts in isola­
tion. A fundamentally different approach is required to
understand the whole in context through iterative explo­
ration and adaptation. As a result, SE requires a balance
of linear, procedural methods for sorting through com­
plicatedness (“systematic activity”) and holistic, non­
linear, iterative methods for harnessing complexity
(“systemic” or systems thinking and analysis—always
required when dealing with SoS). The tension between
breaking things apart and keeping them in context must
be dynamically managed throughout the SE process.
The following challenges all influence the engineering
of an SoS (Dahmann, 2014):
1. SoS authorities—In an SoS, each constituent
system has its own local “owner” with its stake­
holders, users, business processes, and develop­
ment approach. As a result, the type of
organizational structure assumed for most tradi­
tional SE under a single authority responsible for
the entire system is absent from most SoS. In an
SoS, SE relies on crosscutting analysis and on

9

composition and integration of constituent systems,
which in turn depend on an agreed common
purpose and motivation for these systems to work
together toward collective objectives that may or
may not coincide with those of the individual
constituent systems.
2. Leadership—Recognizing that the lack of common
authorities and funding poses challenges for SoS, a
related issue is the challenge of leadership in the
multiple organizational environment of an SoS.
This question of leadership is experienced where a
lack of structured control normally present in SE
requires alternatives to provide coherence and
direction, such as influence and incentives.
3. Constituent systems’ perspectives—SoS are typi­
cally composed, at least in part, of in‐service sys­
tems, which were often developed for other
purposes and are now being leveraged to meet a
new or different application with new objectives.
This is the basis for a major issue facing SoS SE,
that is, how to technically address issues that arise
from the fact that the systems identified for the
SoS may be limited in the degree to which they
can support the SoS. These limitations may affect
initial efforts at incorporating a system into an
SoS, and systems’ commitments to other users
may mean that they may not be compatible with
the SoS over time. Further, because the systems
were developed and operate in different situations,
there is a risk that there could be a mismatch in
understanding the services or data provided by one
system to the SoS if the particular system’s context
differs from that of the SoS.
4. Capabilities and requirements—Traditionally
(and ideally), the SE process begins with a clear,
complete set of user requirements and provides a
disciplined approach to develop a system to meet
these requirements. Typically, SoS are comprised
of multiple independent systems with their own
requirements, working toward broader capability
objectives. In the best case, the SoS capability
needs are met by the constituent systems as they
meet their own local requirements. However, in many
cases, the SoS needs may not be consistent with
the requirements for the constituent systems. In
these cases, SoS SE needs to identify alternative
approaches to meeting those needs either through

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

10

Systems Engineering Overview

changes to the constituent systems or through the
addition of other systems to the SoS. In effect, this
is asking the systems to take on new requirements
with the SoS acting as the “user.”
5. Autonomy, interdependencies, and emergence—
The independence of constituent systems in an
SoS is the source of a number of technical issues
facing SE of SoS. The fact that a constituent
system may continue to change independently of
the SoS, along with interdependencies between
that constituent system and other constituent sys­
tems, adds to the complexity of the SoS and further
challenges SE at the SoS level. In particular, these
dynamics can lead to unanticipated effects at
the SoS level leading to unexpected or unpredict­
able behavior in an SoS even if the behavior of
the constituent systems is well understood.
6. Testing, validation, and learning—The fact that
SoS are typically composed of constituent systems
that are independent of the SoS poses challenges
in conducting end‐to‐end SoS testing, as is typi­
cally done with systems. First, unless there is a
clear understanding of the SoS‐level expectations
and measures of those expectations, it can be very
difficult to assess the level of performance as the
basis for determining areas that need attention or
to ensure users of the capabilities and limitations
of the SoS. Even when there is a clear under­
standing of SoS objectives and metrics, testing in a
traditional sense can be difficult. Depending on the
SoS context, there may not be funding or authority
for SoS testing. Often, the development cycles of
the constituent systems are tied to the needs of
their owners and original ongoing user base. With
multiple constituent systems subject to asynchro­
nous development cycles, finding ways to conduct
traditional end‐to‐end testing across the SoS can
be difficult if not impossible. In addition, many
SoS are large and diverse, making traditional
full end‐to‐end testing with every change in a
constituent system prohibitively costly. Often, the
only way to get a good measure of SoS performance
is from data collected from actual operations or
through estimates based on modeling, simulation,
and analysis. Nonetheless, the SoS SE team needs
to enable continuity of operation and performance
of the SoS despite these challenges.

7. SoS principles—SoS is a relatively new area, with
the result that there has been limited attention
given to ways to extend systems thinking to the
issues particular to SoS. Work is needed to identify
and articulate the crosscutting principles that apply
to SoS in general and to develop working exam­
ples of the application of these principles. There is
a major learning curve for the average systems
engineer moving to an SoS environment and a
problem with SoS knowledge transfer within or
across organizations.
Beyond these general SE challenges, in today’s environ­
ment, SoS pose particular issues from a security perspective.
This is because constituent system interface relationships
are rearranged and augmented asynchronously and often
involve commercial off‐the‐shelf (COTS) elements from
a wide variety of sources. Security vulnerabilities may
arise as emergent phenomena from the overall SoS con­
figuration even when individual constituent systems are
sufficiently secure in isolation.
The SoS challenges cited in this section require SE
approaches that combine both the systematic and proce­
dural aspects described in this handbook with holistic,
nonlinear, iterative methods.

2.5

Enabling Systems

Enabling systems are systems that facilitate the life
cycle activities of the SOI. The enabling systems pro­
vide services that are needed by the SOI during one or
more life cycle stages, although the enabling systems are
not a direct element of the operational environment.
Examples of enabling systems include collaboration
development systems, production systems, logistics
support systems, etc. They enable progress of the SOI in
one or more of the life cycle stages. The relationship bet­
ween the enabling system and the SOI may be one where
there is interaction between both systems or one where
the SOI simply receives the services it needs when it is
needed. Figure 2.3 illustrates the relationship of the SOI,
enabling systems, and the other systems in the opera­
tional environment.
During the life cycle stages for an SOI, it is necessary
to concurrently consider the relevant enabling systems
and the SOI. All too often, it is assumed that the enabling

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Definition of Systems Engineering

11

System B in
operational
environment
System C in
operational
environment

System A in
operational
environment

Enabling system
X

Interaction with
systems comprising the
operational environment
System
of interest

Enabling system
Y

Interaction
with enabling systems

Enabling system
Z

Figure 2.3 System of interest, its operational environment, and its enabling systems. This figure is excerpted from ISO/IEC/
IEEE 15288:2015, Figure 3 on page 13, with permission from the ANSI on behalf of the ISO. © ISO 2015. All rights reserved.

systems will be available when needed and are not
­considered in the SOI development. This can lead to
significant issues for the progress of the SOI through its
life cycle.

concept to production to operation. Systems engineering
considers both the business and the technical needs of all
customers with the goal of providing a quality product
that meets the user needs. (INCOSE, 2004)

2.6

Systems engineering is an iterative process of top‐down
synthesis, development, and operation of a real‐world
system that satisfies, in a near optimal manner, the full
range of requirements for the system. (Eisner, 2008)

Definition of Systems Engineering

SE is a perspective, a process, and a profession, as illus­
trated by these three representative definitions:
Systems engineering is an interdisciplinary approach
and means to enable the realization of successful sys­
tems. It focuses on defining customer needs and required
functionality early in the development cycle, document­
ing requirements, and then proceeding with design
­synthesis and system validation while considering the
complete problem: operations, cost and schedule,
performance, training and support, test, manufacturing,
and disposal. Systems engineering integrates all the dis­
ciplines and specialty groups into a team effort forming
a structured development process that proceeds from

Systems engineering is a discipline that concentrates on the
design and application of the whole (system) as ­distinct
from the parts. It involves looking at a problem in its entirety,
taking into account all the facets and all the variables and
relating the social to the technical aspect. (FAA, 2006)

Certain keywords emerge from this sampling—­
interdisciplinary, iterative, sociotechnical, and wholeness.
The SE perspective is based on systems thinking.
Systems thinking (see Section 2.9.2) is a unique per­
spective on reality—a perspective that sharpens our
awareness of wholes and how the parts within those
wholes interrelate. When a system is considered as a

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

12

Systems Engineering Overview

combination of system elements, systems thinking
acknowledges the ­primacy of the whole (system) and the
primacy of the relation of the interrelationships of the
system elements to the whole. Systems thinking occurs
through discovery, learning, diagnosis, and dialogue that
lead to sensing, modeling, and talking about the real
world to better understand, define, and work with sys­
tems. A systems thinker knows how systems fit into the
larger context of day‐to‐day life, how they behave, and
how to manage them.
The SE process has an iterative methodology that sup­
ports discovery, learning, and continuous improvement. As
the process unfolds, systems engineers gain insights into the
relationships between the specified requirements for the
system and the emergent properties of the system. Insights
into the emergent properties of a system can therefore be
gained from understanding the interrelationships of the
system elements and the relation of these to the whole
(system). Due to circular causation, where one system vari­
able can be both the cause and effect of another, even the
simplest of systems can have unexpected and unpredictable
emergent properties. Complexity, as discussed in Section 2.4,
can further exacerbate this problem; hence, one of the
­objectives of the SE process is to minimize undesirable
Table 2.1
1937
1939–1945
1951–1980
1954
1956
1962
1969
1990
1995
2008

Table 2.2
1969
1979
1994
1998
1999
2002
2012

consequences. This can be accomplished through the
inclusion of and contributions from experts across relevant
disciplines coordinated by the systems engineer.
SE includes both technical and management processes,
and both processes depend upon good decision making.
Decisions made early in the life cycle of a system, whose
consequences are not clearly understood, can have enor­
mous implications later in the life of a system. It is the
task of the systems engineer to explore these issues and
make the critical decisions in a timely manner. The roles
of the systems engineer are varied, and Sheard’s “Twelve
Systems Engineering Roles” (1996) provides one
description of these variations.
2.7 Origins and Evolution of
Systems Engineering
The modern origins of SE can be traced to the 1930s
followed quickly by other programs and supporters
­
(Hughes, 1998). Tables 2.1 and 2.2 (Martin, 1996) offer
a thumbnail of some important highlights in the origins
and standards of SE. A list of current significant SE
­standards and guides is provided in Table 2.3.

Important dates in the origins of SE as a discipline
British multidisciplinary team to analyze the air defense system
Bell Labs supported NIKE missile project development
SAGE air defense system defined and managed by Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)
Recommendation by the RAND Corporation to adopt the term “systems engineering”
Invention of systems analysis by RAND Corporation
Publication of A Methodology for Systems Engineering by Hall
Modeling of urban systems at MIT by Jay Forrester
National Council on Systems Engineering (NCOSE) established
INCOSE emerged from NCOSE to incorporate international view
ISO, IEC, IEEE, INCOSE, PSM, and others fully harmonize SE concepts on ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288:2008

Important dates in the origin of SE standards
Mil‐Std 499
Army Field Manual 770‐78
Perry Memorandum urges military contractors to adopt commercial practices. EIA 632 IS (interim standard)
and IEEE 1220 (trial version) issued instead of Mil‐Std 499B
EIA 632 released
IEEE 1220 released
ISO/IEC 15288 released, adopted by IEEE in 2003
Guide to the Systems Engineering Body of Knowledge (SEBoK) released

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Use and Value of Systems Engineering

Table 2.3

13

Current significant SE standards and guides

ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288
ANSI/EIA‐632
ISO/IEC/IEEE 26702
SEBoK
ISO/IEC TR 24748

ISO/IEC/IEEE 24765
ISO/IEC/IEEE 29148
ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010
ISO 10303‐233
OMG SysML™
CMMI‐DEV v1.3
ISO/IEC 15504‐6
ISO/IEC/IEEE 15289
ISO/IEC/IEEE 15939
ISO/IEC/IEEE 16085
ISO/IEC/IEEE 16326
ISO/IEC/IEEE 24748‐4
ISO 31000
TechAmerica/ANSI EIA‐649‐B
ANSI/AIAA G‐043A‐2012e
ISO/IEC/IEEE 15026

Systems and software engineering—System life cycle processes
Processes for engineering a system
Systems engineering—Application and management of the systems engineering process
(replaces IEEE 1220™)
Guide to the systems engineering body of knowledge
Systems and software engineering—Life cycle management—Part 1, guide for life cycle
management; Part 2, guide to the application of ISO/IEC 15288 (system life cycle
processes)
Systems and software engineering—Vocabulary
Software and systems engineering—Life cycle processes—Requirements engineering
Systems and software engineering—Architecture description (replaces IEEE 1471)
Industrial automation systems and integration—Product data representation and exchange—
Part 233: Application protocol: Systems engineering
Object management group (OMG) systems modeling language (SysML™)
Capability maturity model integration (CMMI®) for development
Information technology—Process assessment—Part 6: An exemplar system life cycle process
assessment model
Systems and software engineering—Content of systems and software life cycle process
information products (documentation)
Systems and software engineering—Measurement process
Systems and software engineering—Life cycle processes—Risk management
Systems and software engineering—Life cycle processes—Project management
Life cycle management—Part 4: Systems engineering planning
Risk management—Principles and guidelines
National consensus standard for configuration management
ANSI/AIAA guide to the preparation of operational concept documents
Systems and software assurance—Part 1, concepts and vocabulary; Part 2, assurance case;
Part 4, assurance in the life cycle

With the introduction of the international standard
ISO/IEC 15288 in 2002, the discipline of SE was for­
mally recognized as a preferred mechanism to establish
agreement for the creation of products and services to
be traded between two or more organizations—the
supplier(s) and the acquirer(s). But even this simple
­designation is often confused in a web of contractors
and subcontractors since the context of most systems
today is as a part of an “SoS” (see Section 2.4).
2.8 Use and Value of Systems
Engineering
Even on its earliest projects, SE emerged as an effective
way to manage complexity and change. As both com­
plexity and change continue to escalate in products,
­services, and society, reducing the risk associated with
new systems or modifications to complex systems

continues to be a primary goal of the systems engineer.
This is illustrated in Figure 2.4. The percentages along
the timeline represent the actual life cycle cost (LCC)
accrued over time based on a statistical analysis per­
formed on projects in the US Department of Defense
(DOD), as reported by the Defense Acquisition
University (DAU, 1993). For example, the concept stage
of a new system averages 8% of the total LCC. The curve
for committed costs represents the amount of LCC com­
mitted by project decisions and indicates that when 20%
of the actual cost has been accrued, 80% of the total LCC
has already been committed. The diagonal arrow under
the curve reminds us that errors are less expensive to
remove early in the life cycle.
Figure 2.4 also demonstrates the consequences of
making early decisions without the benefit of good
information and analysis. SE extends the effort per­
formed in concept exploration to reduce the risk of hasty
commitments without adequate study. Though shown as

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Systems Engineering Overview

Cumulative percentage life cycle cost against time

14

100%

95%

Committed costs

85%

90%
80%

500–1000X

70%

70%

a

60%

to
ost

r
ext

s
ect
20–100X

ef
ct d

40%

100%

30%

Develop

20%
10%
0%

Prod/test

C
3–6X

50%

Operations
through
disposal

Design
Concept
8%

15%

50%

20%
Time

Figure 2.4

Committed life cycle cost against time. Reprinted with permission from DAU. All other rights reserved.

linear, the execution of the various life cycle stages asso­
ciated with modern product development is, in actual
application, recursive. Nonetheless, the consequences of
ill‐formed decisions throughout the life cycle are the
same.
Another factor driving the need for SE is that com­
plexity has an ever increasing impact on innovation. Few
new products represent the big‐bang introduction of new
invention; rather, most products and services in today’s
market are the result of incremental improvement. This
means that the life cycle of today’s products and ser­
vices is longer and subject to increasing uncertainty. A
well‐defined SE process becomes critical to establishing
and maintaining a competitive edge in the twenty‐first
century.
As illustrated in Figure 2.5, the development and
market penetration of technology has accelerated by
more than a factor of four over the past 140 years. In
this sample of products, the time it took to achieve
25% market penetration was reduced from about 50
years to below 12 years. On average, development
from prototype to 25% market penetration went from
44 to 17 years.
Two studies have demonstrated the value of SE from
an effectiveness and return on investment (ROI) perspec­
tive. These studies are summarized in the following.

2.8.1

SE Effectiveness

A 2012 study by the National Defense Industrial
Association, the Institute of Electrical and Electronic
Engineers (IEEE), and the Software Engineering Institute
of Carnegie Mellon surveyed 148 development projects
and found clear and significant relationships between the
application of SE activities and the performance of those
projects, as seen in Figure 2.6 and explained in the fol­
lowing (Elm and Goldenson, 2012).
The left column represents those projects deploying
lower levels of SE expertise and capability, as mea­
sured by the quantity and quality of specific SE work
products. Among these projects, only 15% delivered
higher levels of project performance, as measured by
satisfaction of budget, schedule, and technical require­
ments, and 52% delivered lower levels of project
performance. The second column represents those pro­
jects deploying moderate levels of SE expertise and
capability. Among these projects, 24% delivered higher
levels of project performance, and only 29% delivered
lower levels of performance. The third column repre­
sents those projects deploying higher levels of SE
expertise and capability. For these projects, the number
delivering higher levels of project performance
increased substantially to 57%, while those delivering
lower levels decreased to 20%.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Use and Value of Systems Engineering

Developed between
1876 and 1905:
average 44 years

Developed between
1925 and 1960:
average 30 years

15

Developed
after 1975:
average 17 years

Years that it took to penetrate the market at 25%

60
Car

Radio

50

40

VCR

Telephone
30

Microwave

Electricity

Internet

Television
20

Mobile
phone

10

Personal
computer

0
1860

1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

Date that a prototype was developed
Figure 2.5 Technology acceleration over the past 140 years. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Michael Krueger. Usage
per the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

Program performance (perf )

Program performance vs. total SE
100%

15%

80%

24%
57%

33%
60%

Middle
perf

47%

40%
20%
0%

24%

52%
29%

20%

Lower SEC
Middle SEC
Higher SEC
(n = 48)
(n = 49)
(n = 51)
Total systems engineering capability (SEC)
Gamma = 0.49

Higher
perf

Lower
perf
All
projects

p-value < 0.001

Figure 2.6 Project performance versus SE capability. From Elm and Goldenson (2012). Reprinted with permission from
Joseph Elm. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

16

Systems Engineering Overview

2.8.2

SE ROI

A quantitative research project was completed by Eric
Honour and the University of South Australia to quantify the
ROI of SE activities (Honour, 2013). This project gathered
data on 43 survey points and from 48 detailed interviews,
each point representing the total results of a single system
development project. Projects had a wide variety of domains,
sizes, and success levels. Figure 2.7 compares the total SE
effort with cost compliance (top figure) and schedule
performance (bottom figure). Both graphs show that SE
effort has a significant, quantifiable effect on program suc­
cess, with correlation factors as high as 80%. In both graphs,
increasing the percentage of SE within the project results in
better success up to an optimum level, above which addi­
tional SE effort results in poorer performance.

The research results showed that the optimum level of
SE effort for a normalized program is 14% of the total
program cost. In contrast, the median SE effort of the actual
interviewed programs was only 7%, showing that pro­
grams typically operate at about half the optimum level of
SE effort. The optimum level for any program can also be
predicted by adjusting for the program characteristics, with
levels ranging from 8 to 19% of the total program cost.
The ROI of adding additional SE activities to a project
is shown in Table 2.4, and it varies depending on the level
of SE activities already in place. If the project is using no
SE activities, then adding SE carries a 7:1 ROI; for each
cost unit of additional SE, the project total cost will reduce
by 7 cost units. At the median level of the programs inter­
viewed, additional SE effort carries a 3.5:1 ROI.

(a)
3.0

Actual/planned cost

2.6
2.2
1.8
1.4
1.0
0%
0.6

5%

10%

15%

20%

25%

30%

Equivalent SE effort (ESEE) as % program cost

Actual/planned schedule

(b)
3.0
2.6
2.2
1.8
1.4
1.0
0%
0.6

5%

10%

15%

20%

25%

30%

Equivalent SE effort (ESEE) as % program cost

Figure 2.7 Cost (a) and schedule (b) overruns correlated with SE effort. From Honour (2013). Reprinted with permission from
Eric Honour. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Systems Science and Systems Thinking

Table 2.4

17

SE return on investment

Current SE effort (% of program cost)

Average cost overrun (%)

ROI for additional SE effort
(cost reduction $ per $ SE added)

53
24
15
7
3
10

7.0
4.6
3.5
2.1
−0.3
−2.8

0
5
7.2 (median of all programs)
10
15
20

From Honour (2013). Reprinted with permission from Eric Honour. All other rights reserved.

2.9 Systems Science and Systems
Thinking
This section summarizes the nature of systems science and
systems thinking. It also describes how they relate to SE.
2.9.1

Systems Science

Systems science brings together research into all aspects of
systems with the goal of identifying, exploring, and under­
standing patterns of complexity that cross disciplinary fields
and areas of application. It seeks to develop interdisci­
plinary foundations that can form the basis of theories appli­
cable to all types of systems (e.g., in nature, society, and
engineering) independent of element type or application.
Additionally, systems science can help to provide a
common language and intellectual foundation for SE and
make practical system concepts, principles, patterns, and
tools accessible to practitioners of the “systems approach.”
An integrated systems approach for solving complex
problems needs to combine elements of systems science,
systems thinking, and SE. As such, systems science can
serve as the foundation for a metadiscipline that unifies
the traditional scientific specializations.
The information in this section is extracted from the
systems science article in Part 2 of the SEBoK (SEBoK,
2014). Figure 2.8 illustrates the relationships between
systems science, systems thinking, and general systems
approach as applied to engineered systems.
Systems science is an integrative discipline that brings
together ideas from a wide range of sources sharing in a
common systems theme. Some fundamental concepts
now used in systems science have been present in other
disciplines for many centuries, while equally fundamental
concepts have independently emerged as recently as
40 years ago (Flood and Carson, 1993).

Systems science is both the “science of systems” and
the “systems approach to science,” covering theories and
methods that contrast with those of other sciences, which
are generally reductionist in nature. Where it is appro­
priate, the reductionist approach has been very success­
ful in using the methods of separating and isolating in
search of simplicity. However, where those methods are
not appropriate, systems science relies on connecting
and contextualizing to identify patterns of organized
complexity.
Questions about the nature of systems, organization,
and complexity are not specific to the modern age. As
John Warfield (2006) put it,
Virtually every important concept that backs up the key
ideas emergent in systems literature is found in ancient
literature and in the centuries that follow.

It was not until the middle of the twentieth century, how­
ever, that there was a growing sense of a need for, and
possibility of, a scientific approach to the problems of
organization and complexity in a “science of systems”
per se.
Biologist Ludwig von Bertalanffy was one of the
first to argue for and develop a broadly applicable
scientific research approach based on open system theory
(Bertalanffy, 1950). He explained the scientific need for
systems research in terms of the limitations of analytical
procedures in science. These limitations are based on the
idea that an entity can be resolved into and reconstituted
from its parts, either materially or conceptually:
This is the basic principle of “classical” science, which
can be circumscribed in different ways: resolution into
isolable causal trains or seeking for “atomic” units in the
various fields of science, etc.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

18

Systems Engineering Overview

Systems
fundamentals
Groups of
(engineered)
system

Forms basis of

Complexity
Emergence
Types
of systems
What is a
system?

Theories and
methodologies
of systems
approaches

Systems approach
applied to
engineered systems

Explores
and develops

Are
aware of
or active in

Studies

Defines
and evolves

Systems
science

Practice

Systems
science
practitioners

Is used by
Systems representations
concepts, principles
and patterns

Applied
through

Are
competent
in use of

Systems
thinking

Figure 2.8 Systems science in context. From SEBoK (2014). Reprinted with permission from the BKCASE Editorial Board.
All other rights reserved.

Research in systems science attempts to compensate for
the inherent limitations of classical science, most notably
the lack of ways to deal with emergence. Systems sci­
ence has developed—and continues to develop—hand in
hand with practice, each maturing and learning from the
other. Various efforts have taken on complementary or
overlapping issues of the new “systems approach” as
progress has been made over time:
•• Cybernetics (Ashby, 1956; Wiener, 1948)
•• Open system and general system theory (Bertalanffy,
1950, 1968; Flood, 1999)
•• Operations research (Churchman et al., 1950)
•• Hard and soft systems thinking (Checkland, 1998;
Lewin, 1958)
•• Organizational cybernetics (Beer, 1959; Flood, 1999)
•• Critical systems thinking (Jackson, 1989)
•• System dynamics (Forrester, 1961; Senge, 1990)

•• SE (Hall, 1962)
•• System analysis (Ryan, 2008)
•• Service science and service SE (Katzan, 2008)
A broader discussion of contrasts between analytical
procedures and integrative system concepts is provided
in Model‐Oriented Systems Engineering Science
(Hybertson, 2009) from the perspective of a traditional
versus the complex SE views of systems.
2.9.2

Systems Thinking

As a systems engineer, it is vital to develop knowledge and
skills that can be utilized in performing a deep analysis of
problem or opportunity situations for which system
responses are required. As noted earlier, systems science
has contributed to the development of such knowledge.
However, during the twentieth century, a number of

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Systems Science and Systems Thinking

approaches to performing deep analysis have arisen under
the title of “systems thinking.” While it is difficult to put a
precise boundary around systems thinking and differen­
tiate it from systems science, many systems thinking
methods and tools have become popular and have been
successfully utilized in multidisciplinary contexts.
2.9.2.1 System Dynamics Jay Forrester of MIT
developed the DYNAMO simulation language and
observed that a common means of analyzing complex
systems could be used in multiple disciplines (1961).
Several students of Forrester refined these ideas into
methodologies and tools that have provided a useful
basis for analysis. Peter Senge, with his popular book
The Fifth Discipline (1990), established systems thinking
as a discipline. He also developed the link, loop, and
delay language as a means of graphically representing
system dynamics. Based upon two primary loops
(growth and limit), a number of so‐called archetypes
have been developed to describe a variety of situations.
Another student, Barry Richmond, further developed
archetypes by adding flow mechanisms in the simulation
languages STELLA and iTHINK, which are commer­
cially available.
2.9.2.2 Soft Systems and Action Research Peter
Checkland (1975) observed that the use of classical engi­
neering approaches to complex problems falls down
since there are many soft factors (attitudes, practices,
procedures, etc.) that affect systems. He also observed
that the path to improvement must come through the
development and analysis of alternative models. Based
upon analysis, discussion, and dialogue, a course of
action is planned and executed, and the results observed
as feedback for further analysis. John Boardman has
been inspired by Checkland’s work and has developed a
version of the soft systems approach supported by a tool
called Systemigrams (Boardman and Sauser, 2008).
2.9.2.3 Discovering Patterns Central to systems
thinking is the discovery of patterns. A pattern is a repre­
sentation of similarities in a set of problems, solutions,
or systems. Systems thinking captures and exploits what
is common in a set of problems and corresponding solu­
tions in the form of patterns of various types, as noted in
the archetypes described previously.
Systems engineers use the general information
provided by patterns to understand a specific system

19

problem and to develop a specific system solution.
Examples include, but are not limited to, the
following:
•• Software design patterns, such as adapter
•• System architecture patterns, such as layered
architecture and single sign‐on
•• Community or urban design patterns, such as ring
road, pedestrian street, and food court
•• Security and safety patterns, such as fault‐tolerant
design and role‐based access control
•• Interaction patterns, such as publish–subscribe
•• Domain‐specific patterns, such as the suspension
bridge pattern
Pattern categories include domain taxonomies, stan­
dards, templates, architecture styles, reference architec­
tures, product lines, abstract data types, and classes in
class hierarchies.
Another important category of patterns is associ­
ated with complex, counterintuitive systems. An
example is “shifting the burden.” When a problem
appears in a complex system, the intuitive response is
to apply a quick short‐term fix, rather than take the
time to develop a long‐term solution. The problem
with that approach is that there is often a trade‐off bet­
ween the short‐term fix and the long‐term solution,
such that the initial success of the quick fix reduces the
chances the real solution will be developed. This
pattern appears in the typical short‐term/long‐term pri­
ority struggle between the systems engineer, project
manager, discipline engineering communities, and
other stakeholders within a project. Shifting the burden
is one of a set of “system archetypes,” a class of pat­
terns (sometimes called patterns of failure or antipat­
terns) that illustrate the underlying systems pathology
behind many of the barriers to effective SE. Awareness
and understanding of these patterns are important for
people trying to embed the systems approach in their
organization and take positive action to counter these
challenges. Additional examples and references are
given in the article “Patterns of Systems Thinking” in
(SEBoK, 2014).
2.9.2.4 Habits of a Systems Thinker While there
are several additional aspects of systems thinking
introduced by multiple contributors, the following list

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

20

Systems Engineering Overview

s­ummarizes essential properties of a systems thinker
(Waters Foundation, 2013):
•• Seeks to understand the big picture
•• Observes how elements within the system change
over time, generating patterns and trends
•• Recognizes that a systems’ structure (elements and
their interactions) generates behavior
•• Identifies the circular nature of complex cause‐and‐
effect relationships
•• Surfaces and tests assumptions
•• Changes perspective to increase understanding
•• Considers an issue fully and resists the urge to
come to a quick conclusion
•• Considers how mental models affect current reality
and the future
•• Uses understanding of system structure to identify
possible leverage actions
•• Considers both short‐ and long‐term consequences
of actions
•• Finds where unintended consequences emerge
•• Recognizes the impact of time delays when exploring
cause‐and‐effect relationships
•• Checks results and changes actions if needed:
­“successive approximation”
People who think and act in a “systems way” are essential
to the success of both research and practice (Lawson,
2010). Successful systems research will not only apply
systems thinking to the topic being researched but should
also consider a systems thinking approach to the way the
research is planned and conducted. It would also be of
benefit to have people involved in research who have, at
a minimum, an awareness of systems practice and ide­
ally are involved in practical applications of the theories
they develop.
For a more thorough description of the “discipline” of
systems thinking, refer to Part 2 of SEBoK (2014) as
well as the popular website Systems Thinking World
(Bellinger, 2013).
2.9.3

Considerations for Systems Engineers

Sillitto (2012) provides a useful digest of concepts from
systems science and systems thinking, organized so
as to be immediately useful to the SE practitioner.

Properties that are generally true of the sort of systems
that systems engineers find themselves involved with
are as follows:
1. A system exists within a wider “context” or
environment.
•• The context includes an “operational environ­
ment,” a “threat environment,” and a “resource
environment” (Hitchens, 2003).
•• The context may also contain collaborating and
competing systems.
2. A system is made up of parts that interact with
each other and the wider context.
•• The parts may be any or all of hardware, software,
information, services, people, organizations,
processes, services, etc.
•• Interactions may include exchange of information,
energy, and resources.
3. A system has system‐level properties (“emergent
properties”) that are properties of the whole system
not attributable to individual parts.
•• Emergent properties depend on the structure
(parts and relationships between them) of the
whole system and on its interactions with the
environment.
•• This structure determines the interactions bet­
ween functions, behavior, and performance of
the parts and interaction of the system with
the environment—in ways both intended and
unintended.
4. A system has the following:
•• A life cycle
•• Function, which can be characterized following
Hitchens as “operate – maintain viability –
manage resources” or as “observe – orient –
­
decide – act” (Hitchens, 2003)
•• Structure, including the following:
–– A boundary, which may be static or dynamic
and physical or conceptual
–– A set of parts
–– The set of relationships and potential interac­
tions between the parts of the system and
across the boundary (interfaces)
•• Behavior, including state change and exchange
of information, energy, and resources

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Systems Engineering Leadership

•• Performance characteristics associated with
function and behavior in given environmental
conditions and system states
5. A system both changes and adapts to its environment
when it is deployed (inserted into its environment).
6. Systems contain multiple feedback loops with var­
iable time constants, so that cause‐and‐effect rela­
tionships may not be immediately obvious or easy
to determine.
Additional properties that are “sometimes true” that sys­
tems engineers are likely to encounter are as follows:
1. A system may exist independent of human
intentionality.
2. A system may be part of one or several wider
“containing systems.”
3. A system may be self‐sustaining, self‐organizing,
and dynamically evolving (such systems include
“complex adaptive systems”).
4. A system may offer “affordances”—features that
provide the potential for interaction by “affording
the ability to do something” (Norman, 1990):
•• Affordances will lead to interactions whether
planned or not. For example, the affordance of a
runway to let planes land and take off also leads
to a possibly unintended affordance to drive
vehicles across it, which may get in the way of
planes, leading to undesirable emergent whole‐
system behavior.
5. A system may be:
•• Clearly bounded and distinct from its context
(the solar system, Earth, planes, trains, automo­
biles, ships, people)
•• Closely coupled with or embedded in its context
(a bridge, a town, a runway, the human cardio­
vascular system, the Internet)
•• Of fluid and dynamic makeup (a club, team,
social group, ecosystem, flock of geese, and
again the Internet)
6. A system may be technical (requiring one or mul­
tiple disciplines to design), social, ecological, envi­
ronmental, or a compound of any or all of these.
These lists help explain the need for systems engineers
to think about the SOI in its wider context, so as to ensure

21

they understand both the properties important to the
s­ ystem’s purpose and those that might give rise to unde­
sirable unintended consequences.

2.10

Systems Engineering Leadership

Many of the processes in this handbook rightly discuss
management (e.g., decision management, risk manage­
ment, portfolio management, knowledge management),
and these are all important aspects of the SE process.
However, leadership is an equally important topic to
­systems engineers. In a paper entitled “What Leaders
Really Do,” J. P. Kotter (2001) states that “leadership is
different from management, but not for the reason most
people think.” Kotter defines the key differences ­between
leaders and managers as:
•• Coping with change versus coping with complexity
•• Setting a direction versus planning and budgeting
•• Aligning people versus organizing and staffing
•• Motivating people versus controlling and problem
solving
A quote often attributed to Peter Drucker is: “Managers
do things right. Leaders do the right things.” Compare
this to the informal definitions of the SE verification
and validation processes: “Verification ensures you
built the system right. Validation ensures you built the
right system.” Both verification and validation are
important for the development of systems. Likewise,
both management and leadership are important for
systems engineers and their teams. Different phases of
a project demand emphasis on different aspects of
leadership.
Aspects of leadership that are particularly relevant for
systems engineers include:
•• Thinking strategically and looking at the long‐term
implications of decisions and actions to set vision
and course
•• Seeing the “big picture”
•• Casting or capturing the vision for the organization
and communicating it (the systems engineer may
be working in support of the identified leader, or
sometimes, it isn’t the leader’s prerogative to “cast”
the vision)

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

22

Systems Engineering Overview

•• Defining the journey from the “as is” of today to the
“to be” of tomorrow
•• Turning ambiguous problem statements into clear,
precise solution challenges for the team
•• Working with the stakeholders (including customers),
representing their points of view to the team and the
team’s point of view to them
•• Maximizing customer value by ensuring a direct tie
of all engineering effort to the customer business or
mission needs
•• Establishing an environment for harmonious teams
while working to leverage the potential benefits of
diversity (including bridging cultural and commu­
nication differences in multidisciplinary teams)
•• Challenging conventional wisdom at all levels
•• Managing conflicts and facilitating healthy conflict
around ideas and alternatives
•• Facilitating decision making
•• Demanding and enabling excellence
Leadership is both an opportunity and a critical respon­
sibility of the systems engineer. The SE leader must
have a systems view that takes into account the context,
boundaries, interrelationships, and scope. They drive
better solutions through the holistic understanding of the

problem and its context and environment. SE leaders
highlight the risks of unintended consequences in a pro­
active manner. Many times, SE leaders need to move the
conversation from “price and cost” to “value and ROI.”
SE leaders need to serve as a model for the adaptability,
agility, and resilience that is sought in both the systems
and the teams that develop them. After all, SE leaders
have the “best seat in the house” for seeing the broader
systems view (Long, 2013).

2.11 Systems Engineering
Professional Development
To efficiently and cost‐effectively deliver differentiated
products to the market, an organization needs to know what
gaps exist in their overall capability. An individual needs to
know what skills would enable them to be more effective,
to develop those skills, and to have a standard to demon­
strate and communicate their skill levels. The overall
system for optimizing SE delivery is shown in Figure 2.9.
Most development, but especially for SE, is achieved
through experience and on‐the‐job training. Typically,
70% of development is achieved through experience,
20% through mentoring, and only 10% through training
(Lombardo and Eichinger, 1996). Training creates an

SE effectiveness
assessment

Execute

Is our systems engineering producing
effective results and artifacts?

Monitor using design
quality dashboard

No
SE skills
assessment
Do our systems engineers have the
right skills?

No

Yes

SE competency
development

SE planning
guideline

SE competency models
certification, training

Do we have the right systems
engineering activities with right
level or rigor?

Figure 2.9 SE optimization system. Reprinted with permission from Chris Unger. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Systems Engineering Professional Development

Known
development
objectives
Self-assessment
SE skills assessment
(competency levels)

Career
development
plan
Results/
output
Recommendations
for
• Training
• Products
• Services

Mini
assessments
Figure 2.10

Professional development system. Reprinted with permission from Chris Unger. All other rights reserved.

understanding of basic concepts, while the mentor
helps developing systems engineers absorb the appro­
priate lessons from practical experience. The model in
Figure 2.10 shows how SE development can work for
an individual (either pursuing certification or in a
development discussion with their manager).
INCOSE has developed an SE Competency
Framework based on the work of the INCOSE United
Kingdom Chapter. Use of the framework can enable
employees to analyze their skills and evaluate the need
for training, coaching, or new job assignments to fill any
gaps found in the assessment (INCOSE UK, 2010). The
framework defines three classes of competencies and
aligns relevant competencies to each class. The classes
are systems thinking, holistic life cycle view, and SE
management. The framework has defined four skill
levels: awareness, supervised practitioner, practitioner,
and expert. The framework is tailorable to the needs of
the organization.
2.11.1

23

SE Professional Ethics

There will always be pressure to cut corners to deliver
programs faster or at lower costs, especially for a pro­
fession such as SE. As stated in the INCOSE Code of
Ethics,
The practice of Systems Engineering can result in
significant social and environmental benefits, but only if
unintended and undesired effects are considered and
mitigated.

Part of the role of the systems engineer as a leader and
professional is knowing when unacceptable risks or
trade‐offs are being made, knowing how to influence key
stakeholders, and having the courage to stand up for the
customers, community, and profession when necessary.
The INCOSE Code of Ethics contains sections on
“Fundamental Principles,” “Fundamental Duties to Society
and Public Infrastructure,” and “Rules of Practice” to
help the SE professional in practical applications of
ethics to their work and daily lives (INCOSE, 2006).

2.11.2

Professional Certification

INCOSE offers a multilevel SE professional certification
program to provide a formal method for recognizing the
knowledge and experience of systems engineers
throughout the world. Three certification levels are avail­
able through INCOSE:
•• Associate Systems Engineering Professional
(ASEP)—Applicants are required to successfully
complete a knowledge examination.
•• Certified Systems Engineering Professional
(CSEP)—Requires a minimum of 5 years of prac­
tical SE experience, a technical degree (additional
years of SE experience can be used in lieu of a
technical degree), three professional references
covering the candidate’s cumulative years of expe­
rience, and successful completion of a knowledge
examination.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

24

Systems Engineering Overview

•• Expert Systems Engineering Professional (ESEP)—
Requires a minimum of 25 years of practical SE
experience, a minimum of 5 years of professional
leadership credits, a technical degree (additional
years of experience can be used in lieu of a technical
degree), and three professional references covering

at least the most recent 10 years of experience. The
ESEP award is based on panel review and approval.
Additional details on the requirements for SE professional
certification are available on the INCOSE website at
http://www.incose.org/.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

3
Generic Life Cycle Stages

3.1

Introduction

Every man‐made system has a life cycle, even if it is not
formally defined. A life cycle can be defined as the series
of stages through which something (a system or manufactured product) passes. In keeping with increased awareness of environmental issues, the life cycle for any system
of interest (SOI) must encompass not only the development,
production, utilization, and support stages but also provide early focus on the retirement stage when decommissioning and disposal of the system will occur. The needs
for each of the subsequent stages must be considered during the earlier stages, especially during the concept and
development stages, in order to make the appropriate
trades and decisions to accommodate the needs of later
stages in an affordable and effective manner.
The role of the systems engineer encompasses the
entire life cycle for the SOI. Systems engineers orchestrate the development of a solution from requirements
definition through design, build, integration, verification, operations, and ultimately system retirement by
assuring that domain experts are properly involved, that
all advantageous opportunities are pursued, and that all
significant risks are identified and mitigated. The systems engineer works closely with the project manager in

tailoring the generic life cycle, including key decision
gates, to meet the needs of their specific project. Per
ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,
5.4.2—Life cycles vary according to the nature, purpose,
use and prevailing circumstances of the system …

The purpose in defining the system life cycle is to establish a framework for meeting the stakeholders’ needs in
an orderly and efficient manner for the whole life cycle.
This is usually done by defining life cycle stages and
using decision gates to determine readiness to move from
one stage to the next. Skipping stages and eliminating
“time‐consuming” decision gates can greatly increase the
risks (cost, schedule, and performance) and may adversely
affect the technical development as well by reducing the
level of the SE effort, as discussed in Section 2.8.
Systems engineering (SE) tasks are usually concentrated at the beginning of the life cycle, but both industry
and government organizations recognize the need for SE
throughout the systems’ life span, often to modify or
change a system product or service after it enters production or is placed in operation. Consequently, SE is an
important part of all life cycle stages. During the utilization and support stages, for example, SE executes

INCOSE Systems Engineering Handbook: A Guide for System Life Cycle Processes and Activities, Fourth Edition.
Edited by David D. Walden, Garry J. Roedler, Kevin J. Forsberg, R. Douglas Hamelin and Thomas M. Shortell.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

25

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

26

Generic Life Cycle Stages

performance analysis, interface monitoring, failure
­analysis, logistics analysis, tracking, management, etc. that
is essential to ongoing operation and support of the system.

engineers sometimes lose sight of: time to breakeven
(indicated by the circle) and return on investment
(indicated by the lower curve).

3.2

Life Cycle Characteristics

3.2.2

3.2.1

Three Aspects of the Life Cycle

Every system life cycle consists of multiple aspects,
including the business aspect (business case), the budget
aspect (funding), and the technical aspect (product). The
systems engineer creates technical solutions that are
consistent with the business case and the funding constraints. System integrity requires that these three aspects
are in balance and given equal emphasis at all decision
gate reviews. For example, when Motorola’s Iridium
project started in the late 1980s, the concept of satellite‐
based mobile phones was a breakthrough and would
clearly capture a significant market share. Over the next
dozen years, the technical reviews ensured a highly successful technical solution. In fact, in the first decade of
the twenty‐first century, the Iridium project is proving to
be a good business venture for all except for the original
team who had to sell all the assets—at about 2% of their
investment—through the bankruptcy court. The original
team lost sight of the competition and changing consumer
patterns that substantially altered the original business
case. Figure 3.1 highlights two critical parameters that

Decision Gates

Decision gates, also known as control gates, are often
called “milestones” or “reviews.” A decision gate is an
approval event in the project cycle, sufficiently important
to be defined and included in the schedule by the project
manager, executive management, or the customer. Entry
and exit criteria are established for each gate at the time
they are included into the project management baseline.
Decision gates ensure that new activities are not pursued
until the previously scheduled activities, on which new
activities depend, are satisfactorily completed and placed
under configuration control. Proceeding beyond the
decision gate before the project is ready entails risk. The
project manager may decide to accept that risk, as is
done, for instance, with long‐lead item procurement.
All decision gates are both reviews and milestones;
however, not all reviews and milestones are decision
gates. Decision gates address the following questions:
•• Does the project deliverable still satisfy the business
case?
•• Is it affordable?
•• Can it be delivered when needed?

Concept
Development

Order intake
Production

Accumulated $

Return on investment
Utilization

Investments

Revenues
Break even

–10 –5

5

10

15

20

Years

Not drawn to scale
Figure 3.1
reserved.

Generic business life cycle. From Stoewer (2005). Reprinted with permission from Heinz Stoewer. All other rights

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Life Cycle Stages

Decision gates represent major decision points in the system
life cycle. The primary objectives of decision gates are to:
•• Ensure that the elaboration of the business and
technical baselines are acceptable and will lead to
satisfactory verification and validation (V&V)
•• Ensure that the next step is achievable and the risk
of proceeding is acceptable
•• Continue to foster buyer and seller teamwork
•• Synchronize project activities
There are at least two decision gates in any project:
authority to proceed and final acceptance of the project
deliverable. The project team needs to decide which life
cycle stages are appropriate for their project and which
decision gates beyond the basic two are needed. Each
decision gate must have a beneficial purpose; “pro
forma” reviews waste everyone’s time.
Even in agile development (see Section 9.9), frequent
interaction with stakeholders may minimize, but not eliminate, the need for decision gates. The consequences of conducting a superficial review, omitting a critical discipline,
or skipping a decision gate are usually long term and costly.
The project business case issues of market demand,
affordability, and realistic schedules are important decision
criteria influencing concept selection, and they should be
updated and evaluated at every decision gate. Inadequate
checks along the way can set up subsequent failures—usually
a major factor in cost overruns and delays. At each gate, the
decision options are typically similar to the following:
•• Acceptable: Proceed with the next stage of the
project.
•• Acceptable with reservations: Proceed and respond
to action items.
•• Unacceptable: Do not proceed—continue this
stage and repeat the review when ready.
•• Unacceptable: Return to a preceding stage.
•• Unacceptable: Put a hold on project activity.
•• Unsalvageable: Terminate the project.
Decision gate descriptions should identify the:
•• Purpose and scope of the decision gate
•• Entry and exit criteria
•• Host and chairperson

27

•• Attendees
•• Location
•• Agenda and how the decision gate is to be conducted
•• Evidence to be evaluated
•• Actions resulting from the decision gate
•• Method of closing the review, including timing for
resolution of open action items
Decision gate approval follows review by qualified
experts and involved stakeholders and is based on hard
evidence of compliance to the criteria of the review.
Balancing the formality and frequency of decision
gates is seen as a critical success factor for all SE process areas. On large or lengthy projects, decisions and
their rationale are maintained using an information
management process.
Upon successful completion of a decision gate, some
artifacts (e.g., documents, models, or other products of a
project life cycle stage) have been approved as the basis
upon which future work must build. These artifacts are
placed under configuration management.

3.3

Life Cycle Stages

ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288 states:
5.4.1—A system progresses through its life cycle as the
result of actions, performed and managed by people in
organizations, using processes for execution of these
actions.

A system “progresses” through a common set of life
cycle stages where it is conceived, developed, produced,
utilized, supported, and retired. The life cycle model is
the framework that helps ensure that the system meets its
required functionality throughout its life. For example,
to define system requirements and develop system solutions during the concept and development stages, experts
from other stages are needed to perform trade‐off
analyses, help make decisions, and arrive at a balanced
solution. This ensures that a system has the necessary
attributes as early as possible. It is also essential to have
the enabling systems available to perform required stage
functions.
Table 3.1 lists six generic life cycle stages (ISO/IEC
TR 24748‐1, 2010). The purpose of each is briefly

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

28

Generic Life Cycle Stages

Table 3.1

Generic life cycle stages, their purposes, and decision gate options

Life cycle stages
Concept

Development

Production
Utilization
Support
Retirement

Purpose

Decision gates

Define problem space
1. Exploratory research
2. Concept selection
Characterize solution space
Identify stakeholders’ needs
Explore ideas and technologies
Refine stakeholders’ needs
Explore feasible concepts
Propose viable solutions
Define/refine system requirements
Create solution description—architecture and design
Implement initial system
Integrate, verify, and validate system
Produce systems
Inspect and verify
Operate system to satisfy users’ needs
Provide sustained system capability
Store, archive, or dispose of the system

Decision options
• Proceed with next stage
• Proceed and respond to action items
• Continue this stage
• Return to preceding stage
• Put a hold on project activity
• Terminate project

This table is excerpted from ISO/IEC TR 24748‐1 (2010), Table 1 on page 14, with permission from the ANSI on behalf of the ISO. © ISO 2010.
All rights reserved.

identified, and the options from decision gate events are
indicated. Note that stages can overlap and the utilization
and support stages run in parallel. Note also that the outcome possibilities for decision gates are the same for all
decision gates. Although the stages in Table 3.1 are listed
as independent, nonoverlapping, and serial, the activities
constituting these stages can be in practice interdependent, overlapping, and concurrent.
Consequently, a discussion of system life cycle stages
does not imply that the project should follow a predetermined set of activities or processes unless they add value
toward achieving the final goal. Serial time progression
is not inherently part of a life cycle model (stages do not
necessarily occur serially one after another in time
sequence). One possible example of the “progression” of
a system through its life cycle is shown in Figure 3.2.
When, in this handbook, reference is made to an earlier,
prior, next, subsequent, or later stage, this type of model
must be kept in mind to avoid confusion by inferring
serial time sequencing. Subsequent chapters of this handbook will define processes and activities to meet the
objectives of these life cycle stages. Because of the iterative nature of SE, specific processes are not aligned to
individual life cycle stages. Rather, the entire set of SE

Development

Concept

Production

Iteration and recursion
possible on all paths

Utilization

Retirement

Support
Figure 3.2 Life cycle model with some of the possible
progressions. This figure is excerpted from ISO/IEC TR
24748‐1 (2010), Figure 7 on page 13, with permission from the
ANSI on behalf of the ISO. © ISO 2010. All rights reserved.

processes is considered and applied at each stage of life
cycle development as appropriate to the scope and complexity of the project.
Figure 3.3 compares the generic life cycle stages to
other life cycle viewpoints. For example, the concept
stage is aligned with the study period for commercial
projects and with the presystem acquisition and the
project planning period in the US Departments of
Defense and Energy, respectively. Typical decision gates
are presented in the bottom line.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Life Cycle Stages

29

Generic life cycle (ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288:2015)
Development
stage

Concept stage

Utilization stage

Production
stage

Retirement
stage

Support stage

Typical high-tech commercial systems integrator
Implementation period

Study period
User
requirements
definition
phase

Concept
definition
phase

System
Acq Source
specification prep select.
phase
phase phase

Typical high-tech commercial manufacturer
Study period
Product
requirements
phase

Product
definition
phase

Product
development
phase

Operations period

Development Verification Deployment Operations and Deactivation
maintenance
phase
phase
phase
phase
phase

Implementation period
Engr.
model
phase

Internal
test
phase

Operations period
Full-scale Manufacturing, Deactivation
production
sales, and
phase
phase
support phase

External
test
phase

US Department of Defense (DoD)
B

A

User
needs

C

Pre-systems acquisition
Materiel
solution
analysis

Tech
opport
resources

IOC

FOC

Systems acquisition
Engineering and
manufacturing
development

Technology
development

Sustainment
Operations and support
(including disposal)

Production and
deployment

National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
Formulation

Feasible concept

Approval

Phase A:
concept & technology
development

Pre-phase A:
concept studies

Top-level architecture

Phase B:
preliminary design &
technology completion
Functional baseline

Implementation

Phase C:
final design &
fabrication
Allocated
baseline

Phase D:
system assembly
integration & test, launch

Product
baseline

Phase E:
operations &
sustainment

Phase F:
closeout

As deployed baseline

US Department of Energy (DoE)
Project planning period
Pre-project
Typical
decision
gates

Preconceptual
planning

New initiative
approval

Concept
approval

Project execution

Conceptual Preliminary Final Construction
design
design
design
Development
approval

Production
approval

Mission
Acceptance

Operational
approval

Operations

Deactivation
approval

Figure 3.3 Comparisons of life cycle models. Derived from Forsberg et al. (2005), Figure 7.2. Reprinted with permission from
Kevin Forsberg. All other rights reserved.

3.3.1

Concept Stage

The concept stage begins with some recognition of a
need for new or modified SOI (ISO/IEC TR 24748‐1,
2010). Many industries employ an exploratory research
activity in the concept stage to study new ideas or
enabling technologies and capabilities, which then
mature into the initiation of a new project (for the SOI).
A great deal of creative SE is done in this stage, and the

systems engineer leading these studies is likely to follow
a new idea into the concept selection, perhaps as project
champion. Often, the exploratory research activity identifies the enabling technologies. If the work is done properly in early stages of the life cycle, it is possible to avoid
recalls and rework in later stages.
Many life cycle models show the process beginning
with “requirements” or “user requirements.” In fact, the

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

30

Generic Life Cycle Stages

process begins earlier with interactions and studies to
understand potential new organizational capabilities,
opportunities, or stakeholder needs. It is critical that in
these early studies, a high‐level, preliminary concept be
created and explored to whatever depth is necessary to
identify technological risks and to assess the technology
readiness level (TRL) of the project. The focus is on
studying potential technologies and determining the
state of what is possible and what is not. In some instances,
the project may be an outgrowth of research activities
where the research engineer or scientist has no connection to a user‐supported need (Forsberg, 1995). The preliminary concept and enabling technologies need to be
identified early, and issues arising from the studies need
to be addressed during the development stage, according
to the National Research Council of the (US) National
Academies (NRC, 2008). One of the challenges in developing alternate concepts is that we often build on what
has worked well for us in the past, without considering
true alternatives, and thereby miss opportunities to make
dramatic improvements. This problem has been widely
recognized (Adams, 1990; Christensen, 2000).
The preliminary concept will also be used to generate
early cost and schedule projections for the project if it
moves ahead. Key activities during exploratory research
are to clearly define the problem space, characterize the
solution space, identify business or mission requirements and stakeholder needs, and, while avoiding any
design work, provide an estimate of the cost and schedule
for the full‐scale development. Incomplete SE in this
stage can lead to poor cost and schedule projections, as
well as poor understanding of technical alternatives,
resulting in poor trades among the alternatives. For
example, the Mars Science Laboratory Rover, scheduled
for launch in 2009, had to be “delayed because of
technical glitches.” This resulted in missing the launch
window, causing a 2‐year delay and a 35% cost growth
over the approved development costs. Program critics,
however, claimed a 400% cost growth based on the early
concept studies, and they threatened the project with
cancellation as a result (Achenbach, 2009).
The preliminary concept is a starting point, not an end
point, as the project moves into the concept selection
activity of the concept stage. The preliminary concept is
not put under configuration control, and the key output
from exploratory research is a clearer understanding of
the business or mission requirements and the stakeholder
needs, an assessment of the technology’s readiness to

move to the next stage, and a rough estimate of the
project cost and schedule requirements and technical
feasibility to first article delivery.
Concept selection is the second activity of the concept
stage. The concept selection activity is a refinement and
broadening of the studies, experiments, and engineering
models pursued during the exploratory research activity.
The first step is to identify, clarify, and document the stakeholders’ conceptual operation of the system across the different stages of use and the environments it is to be used in.
The operational concept (OpsCon) effort should be undertaken to include any changes caused by changes in the
manufacture processes or materials, changes in interface
standards, or new feature enhancements being added that
can drive various aspects of concept selection of the system.
During the concept stage, the team begins in‐depth
studies that evaluate multiple candidate concepts and
eventually provide a substantiated justification for the
system concept that is selected. As part of this evaluation, mock‐ups may be built (for hardware) or coded (for
software), engineering models and simulations may be
executed, and prototypes of critical elements may be
built and tested. Engineering models and prototypes
of critical elements are essential to verify the feasibility
of concepts, to aid the understanding of stakeholder
needs, to explore architectural trade‐offs, and to explore
risks and opportunities. These studies expand the risk
and opportunity evaluation to include affordability
assessment, environmental impact, failure modes, hazard
analysis, technical obsolescence, and system disposal.
Issues related to integration and verification must also be
explored for each alternate system concept, since these
can be discriminators in system selection. The systems
engineer facilitates these analyses by coordinating the
activities of engineers from many disciplines. Key objectives are to provide confidence that the business case is
sound and the proposed solutions are achievable.
The concept stage may include system and key system
element‐level concept and architecture definition and
integration, verification, and validation (IV&V) planning.
Early validation efforts align requirements with stakeholder expectations. The system capabilities specified by
the stakeholders will be met by the combination of system
elements. Problems identified for individual system
element‐level concepts should be addressed early to
minimize the risk that they fall short of the required functionality or performance when the elements are finally
designed and verified.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Life Cycle Stages

31

Figure 3.4 Importance of the concept stage. DILBERT © 1997 Scott Adams. Used with permission from UNIVERSAL
UCLICK. All rights reserved.

Many projects are driven by eager project champions
who want “to get on with it.” They succumb to the temptation to cut short the concept stage, and they use exaggerated projections to support starting development without
adequate understanding of the challenges involved, as
comically illustrated in Figure 3.4. Many commissions
reviewing failed systems after the fact have identified
insufficient or superficial study in the concept stage as a
root cause of failure.
3.3.2

Development Stage

The development stage defines and realizes a SOI that
meets its stakeholder requirements and can be produced,
utilized, supported, and retired. The development stage
begins with the outputs of the concept stage. The primary output of this stage is the SOI. Other outputs can
include a SOI prototype, enabling system requirements
(or the enabling systems themselves), system documentation, and cost estimates for future stages (ISO/IEC TR
24748‐1, 2010).
Business and mission needs, along with stakeholder
requirements, are refined into system requirements.
These requirements are used to create a system
architecture and design. The concept from the previous
stage is refined to ensure all system and stakeholder
requirements are satisfied. Requirements for production,
training, and support facilities are defined. Enabling systems’ requirements and constraints are considered and
incorporated into the design. System analyses are performed to achieve system balance and to optimize the
design for key parameters.

One of the key activities of the development stage is
to specify, analyze, architect, and design the system so
that the system elements and their interfaces are understood and specified. Hardware and software elements are
fabricated and coded.
Operator interfaces are specified, tested, and evaluated during the development stage. Operator and maintainer procedures and training are developed and
delivered to ensure humans can interface with the SOI.
Feedback is obtained from both external and internal
stakeholders through a series of technical reviews and
decision gates. Projects that are not showing acceptable
progress may be redirected or even terminated.
The development stage includes detailed planning
and execution of IV&V activities. The planning for these
activities needs to take place early to ensure that adequate facilities and other resources are available when
needed. A source of additional information about IV&V
and the significance for project cost and risk when these
activities are optimized was the subject of the European
Union SysTest program (Engel, 2010).
3.3.3

Production Stage

The production stage is where the system is produced or
manufactured. Product modifications may be required
to resolve production problems, to reduce production
costs, or to enhance product or system capabilities. Any
of these may influence system requirements and may
require system reverification or revalidation. All such
changes require SE assessment before changes are
approved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

32

Generic Life Cycle Stages

3.3.4

Utilization Stage

The utilization stage is where the system is operated in
its intended environment to deliver its intended services.
Product modifications are often planned for introduction
throughout the operation of the system. Such upgrades
enhance the capabilities of the system. These changes
should be assessed by systems engineers to ensure
smooth integration with the operational system.
For large complex systems, midlife upgrades can be
substantial endeavors requiring SE effort equivalent to a
major program.
3.3.5

Support Stage

The support stage is where the system is provided
­services that enable continued operation. Modifications
may be proposed to resolve supportability problems, to
reduce operational costs, or to extend the life of a system.
These changes require SE assessment to avoid loss of
system capabilities while under operation.
3.3.6

Retirement Stage

The retirement stage is where the system and its related
services are removed from operation. SE activities in this
stage are primarily focused on ensuring that disposal
requirements are satisfied. Planning for retirement is part
of the system definition during the concept stage.
Experience has repeatedly demonstrated the consequences when system retirement is not considered from
the outset. Early in the twenty‐first century, many countries have changed their laws to hold the developer of
a SOI accountable for proper end‐of‐life disposal of
the system.
3.4

Life Cycle Approaches

Various life cycle models, such as the Waterfall (Royce,
1970), Spiral (Boehm, 1986), and Vee (Forsberg and
Mooz, 1991), are useful in defining the start, stop, and
process activities appropriate to the life cycle stages.
Graphical representations of life cycle stages tend to
be linear, but this hides the true incremental, iterative,
and recursive nature of the underlying processes. The
approaches that follow imply full freedom to choose a
development model and are not restricted to sequential
methods.

3.4.1

Iteration and Recursion

Too often, the system definition is viewed as a linear,
sequential, single pass through the processes. However,
valuable information and insight need to be exchanged
between the processes, in order to ensure a good system
definition that effectively and efficiently meets the
mission or business needs. The application of iteration
and recursion to the life cycle processes with the appropriate feedback loops helps to ensure communication
that accounts for ongoing learning and decisions. This
facilitates the incorporation of learning from further
analysis and process application as the technical solution evolves.
Figure 3.5 shows an illustration of iteration and
recursion of the processes. Iteration is the repeated
­
application of and interaction between two or more
processes at a given level in the system structure or hierarchy. Iteration is needed to accommodate stakeholder
decisions and evolving understanding, account for architectural decisions/­
constraints, and resolve trades for
affordability, adaptability, feasibility, resilience, etc.
Although the figure only shows a subset of the life cycle
technical processes, there can be iteration between any
of the processes. For example, there is often iteration
between system requirements definition and architecture
definition. In this case, there is a concurrent application
of the processes with iteration between them, where the
evolving system requirements help to shape the
architecture through identified constraints and functional
and quality requirements. The architecture trades, in
turn, may identify requirements that are not feasible,
driving further requirements analysis with trades that
change some requirements. Likewise, the design definition could identify the need to reconsider decisions and
trades in the requirements definition or architecture
­definition processes. Any of these can invoke additional
application of the system analysis and decision
management processes.
Recursion is the repeated application of and interaction of processes at successive levels in the system structure. The technical processes are expected to be recursively
applied for each successive level of the system structure
until the level is reached where the decision is made to
make, buy, or reuse a system element. During the recursive application of the processes, the outputs at one level
become inputs for the next successive level (below for
system definition, above for system realization).

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Life Cycle Approaches

33

Enterprise/system of systems
Concept definition
Business or mission
analysis
Recursion

Stakeholder needs and
requirements definition

Iteration

System
requirements definition

System analysis and
decision management

System of
interest
Concept definition
Business or mission
analysis

Architecture definition

Stakeholder needs and
requirements definition

Design definition

Iteration

System definition

System
requirements definition
Requirements definition
Architecture definition
Design definition

Figure 3.5

3.4.2

Recursion
System
levelSystem
n–1
levelSystem
n–1
level n–1

Iteration and recursion. Reprinted with permission from Garry Roedler. All other rights reserved.

Sequential Methods

On projects where it is necessary to coordinate large
teams of people working in multiple companies, sequential approaches provide an underlying framework to
­provide discipline to the life cycle processes. Sequential
methods are characterized by a systematic approach
that adheres to specified processes as the system moves
through a series of representations from requirements
through design to finished product. Specific attention is
given to the completeness of documentation, traceability
from requirements, and verification of each representation after the fact.
The strengths of sequential methods are predictability, stability, repeatability, and high assurance.
Process improve­
ment focuses on increasing process
capability through standardization, measurement, and
control. These methods rely on the “master plans” to
anchor their processes and provide project‐wide communication. Historical data is usually carefully collected
and maintained as inputs to future planning to make
projections more accurate (Boehm and Turner, 2004).

Safety‐critical products, such as the Therac‐25
­ edical equipment described in Section 3.6.1, can only
m
meet modern certification standards by following a
thorough, documented set of plans and specifications.
Such standards mandate strict adherence to process and
specified documentation to achieve safety or security.
However, unprecedented projects or projects with a
high rate of unforeseeable change, poor predictability,
and lack of stability often degrade, and a project may
incur significant cost trying to keep documentation and
plans up to date.
The Vee model, introduced in Forsberg and Mooz
(1991), described in Forsberg et al. (2005), and shown in
Figure 3.6, is a sequential method used to visualize
­various key areas for SE focus, particularly during the
concept and development stages. The Vee highlights the
need for continuous validation with the stakeholders,
the need to define verification plans during requirements
development, and the importance of continuous risk and
opportunity assessment.
The Vee model provides a useful illustration of the SE
activities during the life cycle stages. In this version of

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

34

Generic Life Cycle Stages

System
development

Integration, verification, and validation planning

Upper level
system element Integration, verification, and validation planning
development

Solution/system
realization

Upper level
system element
realization

ion

Lower level
system element
development

Lower level
system element
realization

A
inte
grat rchitec
ion
and ture
veri
ficat

n

e
itio
tur fin
tec de
chi nd
Ar tion a
si
po

om
dec

I, V, and V planning

Figure 3.6 Vee model. Derived from Forsberg et al. (2005), Figure 7.10. Reprinted with permission from Kevin Forsberg. All
other rights reserved.

the Vee model, time and system maturity proceed from
left to right. The core of the Vee (i.e., those products that
have been placed under configuration control) depicts
the evolving baseline from stakeholder requirements
agreement to identification of a system concept to definition of elements that will comprise the final system. With
time moving to the right, the evolving baseline defines
the left side of the core of the Vee, as shown in the shaded
portion of Figure 3.7.
A key attribute of the Vee model is that time and
maturity move from the left to the right across the diagram, as shown in Figure 3.7. At any instant of time, the
development team then can move their perspective only
along the vertical arrow, from the highest level of the
system requirements down to the lowest level of detail.
The off‐core opportunity and risk management investigations going downward are addressing development
options to provide assurance that the baseline performance
being considered can indeed be achieved and to initiate
alternate concept studies at the lower levels of detail to

determine the best approach. These downward off‐core
investigations and development efforts are entirely under
control of the development team.
On the other hand, the essential upward off‐core stakeholder discussions (in‐process validation) ensure that the
proposed baselines are acceptable to management, customer, user, and other stakeholders. Changes to enhance
system performance or to reduce risk or cost are welcome
for consideration, but these must go through formal
change control, since others outside the development
team may be building on previously defined and released
design decisions. The power of understanding the significance of the off‐core studies is illustrated in a National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Jet
Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) report (Briedenthal and
Forsberg, 2007).
As entities are implemented, verified, and integrated,
the right side of the core of the Vee is executed. Figure 3.8
illustrates the evolving baseline as system elements are
integrated and verified. Since one can never go backward

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Off-core user discussions and approvals
(in-process validation)
Are the proposed baselines acceptable?
Approved
baseline

Baseline being
considered

Time now
(Vertical line)
with upward and
downward iterations
as required

Baseline verification
How to prove it’s built right

Planned
verification

Baselines
to be
verified

Baselines
to be
considered

Time and baseline maturity

Core of the Vee
Plans, specifications, and
products are under progressive
configuration management

Off-core opportunity and risk management
investigations and actions
How are the opportunities and risks of the
proposed baselines being resolved?

Figure 3.7 Left side of the Vee model. Derived from Forsberg et al. (2005), Figure 7.11. Reprinted with permission from Kevin
Forsberg. All other rights reserved.
Off-core user approval
of baseline and baseline modification
is the verified performance acceptable?

Defined
system
performance
Defined
entity
performance

Core of the Vee
Plans, specifications, and
products are under progressive
configuration management

Baseline validation
Are we building the right thing?

Baseline
verification
Are we building
it right?

Baselines
to be
verified
Baselines
being
verified

Baselines
verified

Time and baseline maturity
“Off-core” verification problem
investigation and resolution
is the problem cause understood?

Figure 3.8 Right side of the Vee model. Derived from Forsberg et al. (2005), Figure 7.12. Reprinted with permission from
Kevin Forsberg. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

36

Generic Life Cycle Stages

in time, all iterations in the Vee are performed on the
vertical “time now” line. Upward iterations involve the
stakeholders and are the in‐process validation activities
that ensure that the proposed baselines are acceptable.
The downward vertical iterations are the essential off‐
core opportunity and risk management investigations
and actions. In each stage of the system life cycle, the SE
processes iterate to ensure that a concept or design is feasible and that the stakeholders remain supportive of the
solution as it evolves.
3.4.3

Incremental and Iterative Methods

Incremental and iterative development (IID) methods
have been in use since the 1960s (Larman and Basili,
2003). They represent a practical and useful approach
that allows a project to provide an initial capability followed by successive deliveries to reach the desired SOI.
The goal is to provide rapid value and responsiveness.
The IID approach is used when the requirements are
unclear from the beginning or the stakeholder wishes to
hold the SOI open to the possibilities of inserting new
technology. Based on an initial set of assumptions, a
candidate SOI is developed and then assessed to determine if it meets the stakeholder needs or requirements. If
not, another evolutionary round is initiated, and the process is repeated until a system is delivered to satisfied
stakeholders or until the organization decides to terminate the effort.
Most literature agrees that IID methods are best
applied to smaller, less complex systems or to system
elements. The focus is on flexibility and on allowing
selected events to be taken out of sequence when the risk
is acceptable. Tailoring in this way highlights the core
activities of product development.
The features that distinguish IID from the sequential
approaches are velocity and adaptability. While market
strategies often emphasize that “time to market” or
“speed” is critical, a more appropriate criterion is
“velocity,” which considers direction in addition to speed.
By incorporating the stakeholders into the working‐level
teams, the project receives continuous feedback that they
are going in a direction that satisfies the stakeholders’
highest needs first. One downside is that reactive project
management with a stakeholder that often changes
direction can result in an unstable, chaotic project. On one
hand, this approach avoids the loss of large investments
in faulty assumptions; on the other hand, emphasis on a

tactical viewpoint may generate short‐term or localized
solution optimizations.
IIDs may also be “plan driven” in nature when the
requirements are known early in the life cycle, but the
development of the functionality is performed incrementally to allow for the latest technology insertion or potential
changes in needs or requirements. A specific IID methodology called evolutionary development (Gilb, 2005) is
common in research and development (R&D) environments. Figure 3.9 illustrates how this approach was used in
the evolution of the tiles for the NASA space shuttle.
An example of an incremental and iterative method is
the Incremental Commitment Spiral Model (ICSM)
(Boehm et al., 2014). The ICSM builds on the strengths
of current process models, such as early V&V concepts
in the Vee model, concurrency concepts in the concurrent
engineering model, lighter‐weight concepts in the agile
and lean models, risk‐driven concepts in the spiral model
Boehm, 1996, the phases and anchor points in the
rational unified process (RUP) (Kruchten, 1999), and
recent extensions of the spiral model to address SoS
capability acquisition (Boehm and Lane, 2007).
A view of the ICSM is shown in Figure 3.10. In the
ICSM, each increment addresses requirements and solutions concurrently, rather than sequentially. ICSM also
considers products and processes; hardware, software,
and human factor aspects; and business case analyses of
alternative product configurations or product line investments. The stakeholders consider the risks and risk mitigation plans and decide on a course of action. If the risks
are acceptable and covered by risk mitigation plans, the
project proceeds into the next spiral.
Figure 3.11 presents another view of the ICSM. The
top row of activities indicates that a number of system
aspects are being concurrently engineered at an increasing
level of understanding, definition, and development.
3.5 What Is Best for Your
Organization, Project, or Team?
Conway’s law suggests that “organizations which design
systems … are constrained to produce designs which
are copies of the communication structures of those
organizations” (Conway, 1968). Systems thinking and
SE help organizations avoid the pitfall of Conway’s law
by ensuring that system designs are appropriate to the
problem being addressed.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

System System accept
and deliver
TRR

Incremental/linear and evolutionary development
single or multiple deliveries

System PDR

Increment 2
PDR
Increment 1
PDR

Incre
Incre 1
1+2
Incre
verif. and
verif. and
1+2
Increment 3
possible
possible
PDR
delivery TRR delivery
Incre 1
TRR

Version 1

Integrate
1+2+3

Version 2 Version 3

Increment 3
evolutionary
development

Code. fab. assemble

Figure 3.9 IID and evolutionary development. Derived from Forsberg et al. (2005), Figure 19.18. Reprinted with permission
from Kevin Forsberg. All other rights reserved.
Cumulative level of understanding, product and process
detail (risk-driven)

Concurrent
engineering of
products and
processes

Operation2
development3
foundations4
Operation1
development2
foundations3
Development1
foundations2
Foundations

Risk-based
stakeholder
commitment
review
points

Valuation
Exploration
6

5

4

3

2

1

Opportunities to
proceed, merge
phases,
backtrack or
terminate
Risk-based decisions
Acceptable
Negligible
Risk
High, but
addressable

Too high,
unaddressable

Evidence-based review content
• A first-class deliverable
• Independent expert review
• Shortfalls are uncertainties and risks

1

Exploration commitment review

2

Valuation commitment review

3

Foundations commitment review

4

Development commitment review

5

Operations1 and development2
commitment review

6

Operations2 and development3
commitment review

Figure 3.10 The incremental commitment spiral model (ICSM). From Boehm et al. (2014). Reprinted with permission from
Barry Boehm. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

38

Generic Life Cycle Stages

Stage II:
incremental development,
operations and production
OCR1
DCR1
DCR2
s
on on 1
ati ducti
r
e
Op d pro
ent 1
t2
pm ns 2
an &P) 1 pmen
o
l
e
o
s
i
o
v
O
t
l
n
( ve tio 3
De nda
u
De nda
o
f
fou

Stage I: incremental definition
ICSM anchor
points
ICSM lifecycle
phases

VCR

ECR

n

tio

ra
plo

FCR

Ex

Va

Initial scoping

Concept
definition

s

ion

on

at
nd

ti
lua

u
Fo

Activities
Concurrent risk-andopportunity-driven
growth of system
understanding and
definition

Investment
analysis

System life cycle
architecture and
ops concept

Increment 1
development

Build-to
increment plans
and specifications

Increment 1
operations and
production

Increment 2
foundations
rebaseline

Increment 2
development
Increment 3
foundations
rebaseline

NDI, outsource
partner selections
Evaluation of
evidence of feasibility
to proceed
Stakeholder review
and commitment

Feasibility
evidence
High, but
addressable

Acceptable

Risk?
Risk?
Too high,
Negligible
unaddressable

Risk?

Risk?

Risk?

Adjust scope, priorities, or discontinue
Exploration
ECR = commitment
review

Valuation
VCR = commitment
review

Foundation
FCR = commitment
review

Development
DCRn = commitment
reviewn

Operations
OCRn = commitment
reviewn

Figure 3.11 Phased view of the generic incremental commitment spiral model process. From Boehm et al. (2014). Reprinted
with permission from Barry Boehm. All other rights reserved.

One of the earliest books on SE management
(Chase, 1974) identified three simple criteria for
such organizations: facilitate communications, streamline
controls, and simplify paperwork. The way to effective
SE management is not “in the direction of formal, formidable, massive documentation. It does, however, reside
in the direction of creating a total environment which is
conducive to the emergence and effective utilization of
creative and inventive talents oriented toward achieving
a system approach with a minimum of management
encumbrances” (Chase, 1974).
Whenever someone (be it an individual or a company)
wants to reach a desired end, they must perform a series of

actions or operations. Further, they must consider the order
of those actions, their dependencies, who will perform
them, what they require and what they will generate, how
long it will take to complete them, and what tools they will
employ. Thus, individuals and organizations follow
processes, be they predefined or ad hoc. Because process
components (activities, products, agents, tools) and their
interactions (information flow, artifacts flow, control,
communication, timing, dependencies, and concurrency)
can vary, processes will differ—even if the performing
organizations have the same level, scope, and goal.
So why should an organization care about processes?
In short, this is to better understand, evaluate, control,

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Introduction to Case Studies

learn, communicate, improve, predict, and certify the work
performed (McConnell, 1998). For a given organizational level, the processes vary with the project’s goals
and available resources. At a high level, the company’s
business strategy determines the business approach, with
the main goals of profitability, time to market, minimum
cost, higher quality, and customer satisfaction setting the
priorities. Similarly, the company’s size; the number,
knowledge, and experience of people (both engineers and
support personnel); and hardware resources determine
how to achieve those goals (Cockburn, 2000). The application domain and the corresponding system requirements, together with other constraints, form another
important factor in defining and applying processes.
So what really is best for my organization? The
answer is that it depends on the situation. Depending on
the perspective, different processes are defined for entire
organizations, teams, or individuals. A “one‐size‐fits‐
all” approach does not work when defining processes;
thus, organizations must continuously document, define,
measure, analyze, assess, compare, and change processes
to best meet project goals. One would hardly expect to
find the same processes used in a startup e‐commerce
company as in NASA. The intended goal shapes a process in terms of scope (namely, the stages and activities
covered) and organizational level. In any case, the
selected processes should help guide people on what to
do—how to divide and coordinate the work—and ensure
effective communication. Coordination and communication, for example, form the main problems in large projects involving many people, especially in distributed
projects where people cannot communicate face to face
(Lindvall and Rus, 2000).

39

in the manufacturing and construction industry domains;
with and without software elements; complex; and subject to scrutiny in the concept, development, utilization,
and support stages as all have a need to be safe for
humans and are constrained by government regulations.
3.6.1

Case 1: Radiation Therapy—The Therac‐25

Introduction to Case Studies

3.6.1.1 Background Therac‐25, a dual‐mode medical
linear accelerator (LINAC), was developed by the medical division of the Atomic Energy Commission Limited
(AECL) of Canada, starting in 1976. A completely computerized system became commercially available in
1982. This new machine could be built at lower production cost, resulting in lower prices for the customers.
However, a series of tragic accidents led to the recommended recall and discontinuation of the system.
The Therac‐25 was a medical LINAC, or particle
accelerator, capable of increasing the energy of electrically charged atomic particles. LINACs accelerate
charged particles by introducing an electric field to produce particle beams (i.e., radiation), which are then
focused by magnets. Medical LINACs are used to treat
cancer patients by exposing malignant cells to radiation.
Since malignant tissues are more sensitive than normal
tissues to radiation exposure, a treatment plan can be
developed that permits the absorption of an amount of
radiation that is fatal to tumors but causes relatively
minor damage to surrounding tissue.
Six accidents involving enormous radiation overdoses
to patients took place between 1985 and 1987. Tragically,
three of these accidents resulted in the death of the
patients. This case is ranked in the top 10 worst software‐
related incidents on many lists. Details of the accidents
and analysis of the case are available from many sources
(Jacky, 1989; Leveson and Turner, 1993; Porrello, n.d.).

Real‐world examples that draw from diverse industries
and types of systems are provided throughout this handbook. Five case studies have been selected to illustrate
the diversity of systems to which SE principles and practices can be applied: medical therapy equipment, a
bridge, a superhigh‐speed train, a breach of a cybersecurity system, and a redesign of a high‐tech medical system
for low‐tech maintenance. They represent examples of
failed, successful, and prototype systems that all define(d)
the state of the art. These studies may be categorized as
medical, infrastructure, and transportation applications;

3.6.1.2 Approach Therac‐25 was a revolutionary
design compared to its predecessors, Therac‐6 and
Therac‐20, both with exceptional safety records. It was
based on a double‐pass concept that allowed a more powerful accelerator to be built into a compact and versatile
machine. AECL designed Therac‐25 to fully utilize the
potential of software control. While Therac‐6 and
Therac‐20 were built as stand‐alone machines and could
be operated without a computer, Therac‐25 depended on
a tight integration of software and hardware. In the new,
tightly coupled system, AECL used software to monitor

3.6

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

40

Generic Life Cycle Stages

the state of the machine and to ensure its proper operations
and safety. Previous versions had included independent
circuits to monitor the status of the beam as well as
hardware interlocks that prevented the machine from
delivering radiation doses that were too high or from
performing any unsafe operation that could potentially
harm the patient. In Therac‐25, AECL decided not to
duplicate these hardware interlocks since the software
already performed status checks and handled all the malfunctions. This meant that the Therac‐25 software had far
more responsibility for safety than the software in the
previous models. If, in the course of treatment, the software detected a minor malfunction, it would pause the
treatment. In this case, the procedure could be restarted
by pressing a single “proceed” key. Only if a serious malfunction was detected was it required to completely reset
the treatment parameters to restart the machine.
The software for Therac‐25 was developed from the
Therac‐20’s software, which was developed from the
Therac‐6’s software. One programmer, over several
years, evolved the Therac‐6 software into the Therac‐25
software. A stand‐alone, real‐time operating system was
added along with application software written in assembly language and tested as a part of the Therac‐25 system
operation. In addition, significant adjustments had been
made to simplify the operator interface and minimize
data entry, since initial operators complained that it took
too long to enter a treatment plan.
At the time of its introduction to market in 1982,
Therac‐25 was classified as a Class II medical device.
Since the Therac‐25 software was based on software used
in the earlier Therac‐20 and Therac‐6 models, Therac‐25
was approved by the Federal Drug Administration under
Premarket Equivalency.
3.6.1.3 Conclusions The errors were introduced in
the concept and early development stages, when the
decisions were made to create the software for Therac‐25
using the modification of existing software from the two
prior machines. The consequences of these actions were
difficult to assess at the time, because the starting point
(software from Therac‐6) was a poorly documented
product and no one except the original software developer could follow the logic (Leveson and Turner, 1993).
This case illustrates the importance of the off‐the‐Vee‐
core studies early in development (see Fig. 3.7).
The issues from the Therac case are, unfortunately,
still relevant, as evidenced by similar deaths for similar

reasons in 2007 upon the introduction of new LINAC‐
based radiation therapy machines (Bogdanich, 2010).
3.6.2 Case 2: Joining Two Countries—The
Øresund Bridge
3.6.2.1 Background The Øresund Region is composed of eastern Denmark and southern Sweden and
since 2000 has been linked by the Øresund Bridge. The
area includes two major cities, Copenhagen and Malmö,
has a population of 3 million, and counts as Europe’s
eighth largest economic center. One fifth of the total
Danish and Swedish Gross National Product (GNP) is
produced in the region. The official name of the bridge is
translated “the Øresund Connection” to underscore the
full integration of the region. For the first time ever,
Sweden is joined permanently to the mainland of Europe
by a 10 min drive or train ride. The cost for the entire
Øresund Connection construction project was calculated
at 30.1 billion DKK (3 billion USD), and the investment
is expected to be paid back by 2035.
The Øresund Bridge is the world’s largest composite
structure, has the longest cable‐stayed bridge span in the
world carrying motorway and railway traffic, and boasts
the highest freestanding pylons. The 7.9 km (5 miles)
long bridge crosses the international navigation route
between the Baltic Sea and the North Sea. A cable‐stayed
high bridge rises 57 m (160 ft) above the surface of the
sea, with a main span of 490 m (0.3 miles). Both the
main span and the approach bridges are constructed as a
two‐level composite steel‐concrete structure. The upper
deck carries a four‐lane motorway, and the lower deck
carries a two‐track railway for both passenger trains and
freight trains. The rest of the distance is spanned by the
artificial island Peberholm (“Pepper” islet, named to
complement the Saltholm islet to the north) and a tunnel
on the Danish side that is the longest immersed concrete
tunnel in the world. Since completion, Peberholm has
become a natural habitat for colonies of rare birds, one of
the largest of its kind in Denmark and Sweden.
Nations other than Denmark and Sweden also contributed to this project. Canada provided a floating crane,
aptly named Svanen (the swan), to carry prefabricated
bridge sections out to the site and place them into position. Forty‐nine steel girders for the approach bridges
were fabricated in Cádiz, Spain. A specially designed
catamaran was built to handle transportation of the foundations for the pylons, which weighed 19,000 tons each.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Introduction to Case Studies

3.6.2.2 Approach As noted in the many histories of
bridge, the development stage of the project began
with well‐defined time, budget, and quality constraints.
The design evolved over more than 7 years, from start
to delivery of final documentation and maintenance
manuals. More than 4000 drawings were produced.
The consortium dealt with changes, as necessary, using
a combination of technical competence and stakeholder cooperation. Notably, there were no disputes
and no significant claims against the owners at the
conclusion, and this has been attributed to the spirit of
partnership.
What is not often reported is that the success of the
development stage is clearly based on the productive,
focused, creative effort in the concept stage that began
when the royal families of Denmark and Sweden finally
agreed in 1990 to move ahead with a bridge project
connecting their two countries. That SE effort shaped the
approach to the project with well‐defined time, budget,
and quality constraints at the transition to the development
stage. During the concept stage, the SE team also recognized that the concerns of environmental groups would—
and should—impact the approach to the construction of
the bridge. The owners took a creative approach by
inviting the head of a key environmental group to be part
of the board of directors.
From the beginning of the development stage, the
owners defined comprehensive requirements and
provided definition drawings as part of the contract documents to ensure a project result that not only fulfilled
the quality requirements on materials and workmanship
but also had the envisioned appearance. The contractor
was responsible for the detailed design and for delivering
a quality‐assured product in accordance with the owners’
requirements. The following are representative of the
requirements levied at the start of the project:
•• Schedule: Design life, 100 years; construction time,
1996–2000
•• Railway: Rail load, International Union of Railways
(UIC) 71; train speed, 200 km/h
•• Motorway: Road axle load, 260 kN; vehicle speed,
120 km/h
•• Ambient environment: Wind speed (10 min),
61 m/s; wave height, 2.5 m; ice thickness, 0.6 m;
temperature, +/− 27°C
•• Ship impact: To pylons, 560 MN; to girder, 35 MN

41

In addition to established requirements, this project
crossed national boundaries and was thereby subject to
the legislations of each country. Technical requirements
were based on the Eurocodes, with project‐specific
amendments made to suit the national standards of both
countries. Special safety regulations were set up for the
working conditions, meeting the individual safety standards of Denmark and Sweden.
The railway link introduced yet another challenge. In
Denmark, the rail traffic is right handed, as on roadways,
whereas the trains in Sweden pass on the left‐hand side.
The connection needed to ensure a logical transition
­between the two systems, including safety aspects. In
addition, the railway power supply differs between the
two countries; thus, it was necessary to develop a system
that could accommodate power supply for both railway
systems and switch between them on the fly.
The design of a major cable‐stayed bridge with
approach spans for both road and railway traffic
involves several disciplines, including, but not limited
to, geotechnical engineering, aerodynamics, foundation
engineering, wind tunnel tests, design of piers and
pylons, design of composite girders, design of cables and
anchorages, design of structural monitoring system, ship
impact analysis, earthquake analysis, analysis of shrinkage and creep of concrete, ice load analysis, fatigue analysis, pavement design, mechanical systems, electrical
systems, comfort analysis for railway passengers, traffic
forecast, operation and maintenance aspects, analysis of
construction stages, risk analysis for construction and
operation, quality management, and environmental
studies and monitoring.
Comprehensive risk analyses were carried out in
­connection with the initial planning studies, including
specification of requirements to secure all safety aspects.
Important examples of the results of these studies for the
Øresund Bridge were as follows:
•• Navigation span was increased from 330 to 490 m.
•• The navigation channel was realigned and deepened to reduce ship groundings.
•• Pier protection islands were introduced to mitigate
bridge/ship accidents.
Risks were considered in a systematic way, using contemporary risk analysis methods such as functional
safety analysis using fault tree and “what‐if” techniques.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

42

Generic Life Cycle Stages

Three main issues were considered under the design–build
contract:
•• General identification and assessment of construction
risks
•• Ship collision in connection with realignment of
navigation channel
•• Risks in connection with 5‐year bridge operation
by contractor
A fully quantified risk assessment of the human safety
and traffic delay risks was carried out for a comprehensive list of hazards, including fire, explosion, train
­collisions and derailments, road accidents, ship collisions and groundings, aircraft collisions, environmental
loads beyond design basis, and toxic spillages. An
example of a consequence of this analysis was the
­provision of passive fire protection on the tunnel walls
and ceilings.
Both Denmark and Sweden are proud of being among
the cleanest industrial countries in the world. Their citizens, and therefore the politicians, would not allow for
any adverse environmental impact from the construction
or operation of a bridge. The Great Belt and Øresund
Strait both constitute corridors between the salty Kattegat
and the sweeter water of the Baltic Sea. Any reduction in
water exchange would reduce the salt content and, therefore, the oxygen content of the Baltic Sea and would
alter its ecological balance. The Danish and Swedish
authorities decided that the bridge should be designed in
such a way that the flow through of water, salt, and
oxygen into the Baltic was not affected. This requirement was designated the zero solution. To limit impacts
on the local flora and fauna in Øresund during the
construction, the Danish and Swedish authorities
imposed a restriction that the spillage of seabed material
from dredging operations should not exceed 5% of the
dredged amounts. The zero solution was obtained by
modeling with two different and independent hydrographical models.
In total, 18 million cubic meters of seabed materials
were dredged. All dredged materials were reused for
­reclamation of the artificial peninsula at Kastrup and
the artificial island, Peberholm. A comprehensive and
intensive monitoring of the environment was performed
to ensure and document the fulfillment of all environmental requirements. In their final status report from
2001, the Danish and Swedish authorities concluded that

the zero solution as well as all environmental requirements related to the construction of the link had been
fulfilled. Continual monitoring of eel grass and common
mussels showed that, after a general but minor decline,
populations had recovered by the time the bridge was
opened. Overall, the environment paid a low price at
both Øresund and the Great Belt because it was given
consideration throughout the planning and construction
stages of the bridges.
3.6.2.3 Conclusions This award‐winning bridge is
the subject of numerous articles and a PhD thesis, where
details of the construction history and collaboration
among all the stakeholders are provided (Jensen, 2014;
Nissen, 2006; Skanska, 2013). This project provides a
clear example of the benefit of a solid concept stage
where the management team was able to resist the
­customer‐driven temptation to jump prematurely into
the development stage.
3.6.3 Case 3: Prototype System—The
Superhigh‐Speed Train in China
3.6.3.1 Background Shanghai Transrapid is the first
commercial high‐speed commuting system using the
state‐of‐the‐art electromagnetic levitation (or maglev)
technology. The train runs from Shanghai’s financial
district to Pudong International Airport, and the total
track length is about 30 km (20 miles). The train takes
7 min and 20 s to complete the journey, can reach
almost 320 km/h (200 mph) in 2 min, and reaches its
maximum speed of 430 km/h (267 mph) within 4 min.
The Shanghai Transrapid project cost 10 billion Yuan
(1.2 billion USD) and took 2.5 years to complete.
Construction began in March 2001, and public service
commenced on January 1, 2003. Critics argue that the
speed over such a short distance is unnecessary and that
the line may never recoup this cost. However, the speculation is that this is a prototype to gather operational
data assessing the feasibility of a Shanghai to Beijing
maglev train route. From this perspective, this project
makes perfect sense.
Prior to this installation, many countries had argued
over the feasibility of maglev trains. They do not have
wheels or use a traditional rail. Rather, powerful magnets
lift the entire train about 10 mm above the special track,
called a guideway, which mainly directs the passage of
the train. Electromagnetic force is used to make the train

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Introduction to Case Studies

hover and to provide vertical and horizontal stabilization.
The frequency, intensity, and direction of the electrical
current in the track control the train’s movement, while
the power for the levitation system is supplied by the
train’s onboard batteries, which recharge whenever the
train is moving. Maglev trains also do not have an
onboard motor. The guideway contains a built‐in electric
motor that generates an electromagnetic field that pulls
the train down the track. Putting the propulsion system in
the guideway rather than onboard the trains makes the
cars lighter, which enables the train to accelerate quickly.
The superhigh speeds are attained largely due to the
reduction of friction.
Despite the high speed, the maglev system runs more
quietly than a typical commuter train, consumes less
energy, and is nearly impossible to derail because of the
way the train’s underside partially wraps around the
guideway, like a giant set of arms hugging the train to
the elevated platform. Passengers experience a comfortable and quiet ride due to the maglev technology and the
specially designed window; noise level is less than
60 decibels at a speed of 300 km/h.
3.6.3.2 Approach The Chinese authorities considered the economical operation, low energy consumption,
less environmental impact, and high speed when choosing a solution suitable for ground transport between hubs
that range from hundreds to over 1000 km apart. But the
same solution also needed to be suitable for modern
mass rapid passenger transportation between a center
city and adjacent cities. Despite the many advantages, in
1999, the technology was considered to be in an experimental stage—its technological superiority, safety, and
economic performance not yet proven by commercialized operation. The current line is the result of a compromise; it was built as a demonstration to verify the
maturity, availability, economics, and safety of a high‐
speed maglev transportation system.
The basic technology to create a maglev system has
been around since 1979, but until this project, it had
never been realized, mostly due to the expense of
developing a new train system. Many experts believe
that superfast steel‐wheel rail systems—such as those in
France and Japan—have reached the limits of this technology and cannot go any faster. Maglev proponents
describe the system as “the first fundamental innovation
in the field of railway technology since the invention of
the railway” and are watching proposals for maglev

43

installations in Germany and the United States (BBC,
2002; McGrath, 2003; SMTDC, 2005; Transrapid
International, 2003).
3.6.3.3 Conclusions From an SE perspective, this
case illustrates the fact that a project that goes through all
the stages from concept to operations may in fact simply
be part of the concept stage of a larger effort.
3.6.4 Case 4: Cybersecurity Considerations
in Systems Engineering—The Stuxnet Attack
on a Cyber‐Physical System
3.6.4.1 Background As our world becomes increasingly digital, the issue of cybersecurity is a factor that
systems engineers need to take into account. Both
hardware and software systems are increasingly at risk
for disruption or damage caused by threats taking
advantage of digital technologies. Stuxnet, a cyber attack
on Iran’s nuclear capabilities, illustrates the need for systems engineers to be comprehensive in their assessment
of vulnerabilities and rigorous in their m
­ itigation of
attack potential (Failliere, 2011; Langner, 2012).
This case study discusses a new degree of attack
sophistication previously unseen—a new level of malware complexity at military‐grade performance, nearly
no side effects, and pinpoint accuracy. However, though
the creation and deployment of Stuxnet were expensive
undertakings, the strategy, tactical methods, and code
mechanisms are now openly available for others to reuse
and build upon at much less expense. Cyber‐physical
system attacks are becoming increasingly prevalent, and
SE must consider the implications of cybersecurity to
reduce the vulnerabilities.
Iran’s Natanz nuclear fuel enrichment plant (FEP) is a
military‐hardened facility, with a security fence surrounding a complex of buildings, which are in turn each protected by a series of concrete walls. The complex contains
several “cascade halls” for the production of enriched
uranium in gas centrifuges. This facility was further hardened with a roof of several meters of reinforced concrete
and covered with a thick layer of earth.
Each of the cascade halls is a cyber‐physical system,
with an industrial control system (ICS) of programmable
logic controllers (PLCs), computers, an internal network
with no connections to the outside world, and capacity
for thousands of centrifuges. Though the internal network
is isolated from the outside world by an “air gap,”

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

44

Generic Life Cycle Stages

p­ossible vulnerabilities still include malicious insider
collusion, nonmalicious insider insertion of memory
devices brought in from the outside, visiting service technicians, and supply chain intervention. It has been suggested that all of these breech vectors may have played a
role in the massive centrifuge damage that began occurring in 2009 and continued at least through 2010.
Malware, now known as Stuxnet, was introduced into
the ICS of at least one of the cascade halls and managed
to take surreptitious control of the centrifuges, causing
them to spin periodically and repeatedly at rates damaging to sustained physical operation. The net effect of
the attack is still unclear, but at a minimum, it ranged
from disruption of the production process up to potential
permanent damage to the affected centrifuges.
3.6.4.2 Approach Many characteristics of Stuxnet
are unprecedented and stand as the inflection point that
ushers in a new era of system attack methodology and
cyber‐physical system targeting. Illuminating forensic
analysis of the Stuxnet code was conducted by several
well‐known cybersecurity firms, with detailed postmortems covered in two documents from the Institute for
Science and International Security, “Did Stuxnet Take
Out 1000 Centrifuges at the Natanz Enrichment Plant?”
(Albright et al., 2010) and “Stuxnet Malware and Natanz:
Update of ISIS December 22, 2010 Report” (Albright
et al., 2011). This analysis is beneficial in expanding
the risk landscape that systems engineers should consider during design. Below are some concepts that are
concerned in the context of Stuxnet:
•• Knowing what to do (intelligence)—To be successful, a threat has to be able to take advantage of the
targeted system(s). It is uncertain how the perpetrators knew what specific devices were employed in
what configuration at Natanz; but after the Stuxnet
code was analyzed, Natanz was clearly identified as
the target. Stuxnet infected many sites other than
Natanz, but it would only activate if that site was
configured to certain specific system specifications.
The perpetrators needed specific system configuration information to know how to cause damage and
also to know how to single out the target among
many similar but not identical facilities elsewhere.
Systems engineers need to consider that adversaries
will attempt to gain intelligence on a system and
must consider methods to prevent this.

•• Crafting the code—A zero‐day attack is one that
exploits a previously unknown vulnerability in a
computer application, one that developers have had
no time to address and patch. Stuxnet attacked
Windows systems outside the FEP using a variety
of zero‐day exploits and stolen certificates to get
proper insertion into the operating system and then
initiated a multistage propagation mechanism that
started with Universal Serial Bus (USB) removable
media infected outside the FEP and ended with
code insertion into the ICS inside the FEP. Systems
engineers need to be prepared for many different
attack vectors (including internal threats) and must
consider them during system design.
•• Jumping the air gap—It is widely believed that
Stuxnet crossed the air gap on a USB removable
media device, which had been originally infected
on a computer outside of the FEP and carried inside.
But it is also suggested that the supply chain for
PLCs may have been at least one additional infection vector. Whatever the methods, the air gap was
crossed multiple times. USB removable media
could have also affected a bidirectional transfer of
information, sending out detailed intelligence about
device types connected to the FEP network subsequently relayed to remote servers outside of the
control of the facility. Systems engineers always
need to remember that threats to the system are
both inside and outside the system boundary.
•• Dynamic updating—Analysis shows that the attack
code, once inserted, could be updated and changed
over time, perhaps to take advantage of new
knowledge or to implement new objectives. Stuxnet
appears to be continuously updated, with new operational parameters reintroduced as new air gap
crossings occur. Systems engineers need to prepare
for situations after a successful attack has occurred.
3.6.4.3 Conclusions As the complexity and technology of systems change, the systems engineer’s perspective needs to adjust accordingly. The increasing use
of digital‐based technologies in system design offers
enormous benefits to everyone. However, the introduction of digital technologies also brings different risks
than previously dealt with by SE. The case study earlier
illustrates a point in time behind us, and the adversarial
community continues to evolve new methods. The lesson

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Introduction to Case Studies

of this case study is that systems engineers need to
understand the threats toward their system(s), be cognizant that attacks can and will occur, and be proactive in
protecting their system(s). Robust and dynamic system
security needs full engagement of SE. A database that
systems engineers should be aware of is maintained by
the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST, 2012).
3.6.5 Case 5: Design for Maintainability—
Incubators
Note: This case study is excerpted from “Where Good
Ideas Come From: The Natural History of Innovation”
(Johnson, 2010).
3.6.5.1 Background In the late 1870s, a Parisian
obstetrician named Stephane Tarnier was visiting the
Paris Zoo where they had farm animals. While there, he
conceived the idea of adapting a chicken incubator to use
for human newborns, and he hired “the zoo’s poultry
raiser to construct a device that would perform a similar
function for human newborns.” At the time, infant
mortality was staggeringly high “even in a city as sophisticated as Paris. One in five babies died before learning
to crawl, and the odds were far worse for premature
babies born with low birth weights.” Tarnier installed his
incubator for newborns at Maternité de Paris and
embarked on a quick study of 500 babies. “The results
shocked the Parisian medical establishment: while 66
percent of low‐weight babies died within weeks of birth,
only 38 percent died if they were housed in Tarnier’s
incubating box. … Tarnier’s statistical analysis gave
newborn incubation the push that it needed: within a few
years the Paris municipal board required that incubators
be installed in all the city’s maternity hospitals.”
“Modern incubators, supplemented with high‐oxygen
therapy and other advances, became standard equipment
in all American hospitals after the end of World War II,
triggering a spectacular 75 percent decline in infant
mortality rates between 1950 and 1998.”… “In the developing world, however, the infant mortality story remains
bleak. Whereas infant deaths are below ten per thousand
births throughout Europe and the United States, over a
hundred infants die per thousand (births) in countries
like Liberia and Ethiopia, many of them premature
babies that would have survived with access to incubators. But modern incubators are complex, expensive

45

things. A standard incubator in an American hospital
might cost more than $40,000 (about €30,000). But the
expense is arguably the smaller hurdle to overcome.
Complex equipment breaks and when it breaks you need
the technical expertise to fix it, and you need replacement
parts. In the year that followed the 2004 Indian Ocean
tsunami, the Indonesian city of Meulaboh received eight
incubators from a range of international relief organizations. By late 2008, when an MIT professor named
Timothy Prestero visited the hospital, all eight were out
of order, the victims of power surges and tropical
humidity, along with the hospital staff’s inability to read
the English repair manual. The Meulaboh incubators
were a representative sample: some studies suggest that
as much as 95% of medical technology donated to developing countries breaks within the first 5 years of use.”
3.6.5.2 Approach “Prestero had a vested interest in
those broken incubators, because the organization he
founded, Design that Matters, had been working for several years on a scheme for a more reliable, and less
expensive, incubator, one that recognized complex medical technology was likely to have a very different tenure
in a developing world context than it would in an
American or European hospital. Designing an incubator
for a developing country wasn’t just a matter of creating
something that worked; it was also a matter of designing
something that would break in a non‐catastrophic way.
You couldn’t guarantee a steady supply of spare parts, or
trained repair technicians. So instead, Prestero and his
team decided to build an incubator out of parts that were
already abundant in the developing world. The idea had
originated with a Boston doctor named Jonathan Rosen,
who had observed that even the smaller towns of the
developing world seemed to be able to keep automobiles
in working order. The towns might lack air conditioning
and laptops and cable television, but they managed to
keep their Toyota 4Runners on the road. So Rosen
approached Prestero with an idea: What if you made an
incubator out of automobile parts?”
“Three years after Rosen suggested the idea, the
Design that Matters team introduced a prototype device
called NeoNurture. From the outside, it looked like a
streamlined modern incubator, but its guts were automotive. Sealed‐beam headlights supplied the crucial
warmth; dashboard fans provided filtered air circulation;
door chimes sounded alarms. You could power the device
via an adapted cigarette lighter, or a standard‐issue

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

46

Generic Life Cycle Stages

motorcycle battery. Building the NeoNurture out of
car parts was doubly efficient, because it tapped both
the local supply of parts themselves and the local
knowledge of automobile repair. These were both abundant resources in the developing world context, as Rosen
liked to say. You didn’t have to be a trained medical technician to fix the NeoNurture; you didn’t even have to

read the manual. You just needed to know how to replace
a broken headlight.”
3.6.5.3 Conclusions Systems engineers need to consider issues like maintainability, producibility, and supportability at the project outset in the concept stage. It is
too late to add these in during the production stage.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

4
Technical Processes

The ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288 technical processes and sup­
porting process activities are invoked throughout the life
cycle stages of a system. Technical processes are defined
in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288 as follows:
[6.4] The Technical Processes are used to define the
requirements for a system, to transform the requirements
into an effective product, to permit consistent repro­
duction of the product where necessary, to use the
product to provide the required services, to sustain the
provision of those services and to dispose of the prod­
uct when it is retired from service.

Technical processes enable systems engineers to coordi­
nate the interactions between engineering specialists,
other engineering disciplines, system stakeholders and
operators, and manufacturing. They also address confor­
mance with the expectations and legislated requirements
of society. These processes lead to the creation of a suffi­
cient set of requirements and resulting system solutions
that address the desired capabilities within the bounds of
performance, environment, external interfaces, and design
constraints. Without the technical processes, the risk of
project failure would be unacceptably high. As illustrated
in Figure 4.1, the technical processes begin with the
development of needs and requirements (Ryan, 2013):

•• Needs—Per the Oxford English Dictionary, a need
is a thing that is wanted or required. For a system,
needs are often capabilities or things that are lacking
but wanted or desired by one or more stakeholders.
These can be viewed in at least three contexts in
which SE is performed: (i) projects with customers
internal to the enterprise that is doing the engi­
neering, (ii) development under an agreement with
an external entity, and (iii) entrepreneurial product
development in anticipation of future sales.
•• Requirements—Requirements are formal structured
statements that can be verified and validated. There
may be more than one requirement defined for each
need.
Note: One underlying principle illustrated by
Figure 4.1 is that when a decision is made to satisfy a need, that need gives rise to a corresponding
requirement or set of requirements.

ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288 includes 14 technical processes,
the roles of the first four of which are illustrated in
Figure 4.1:
•• Business or mission analysis process—Requirements
definition begins with the business vision of the

INCOSE Systems Engineering Handbook: A Guide for System Life Cycle Processes and Activities, Fourth Edition.
Edited by David D. Walden, Garry J. Roedler, Kevin J. Forsberg, R. Douglas Hamelin and Thomas M. Shortell.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

47

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

48

Technical Processes

Enterprise

Concept of operations
(ConOps)

Enterprise
strategies

Business
management

Preliminary life-cycle concepts:
Operational (OpsCon), acquisition,
deployment, support, retirement

Business
needs

Business
operations

Life-cycle concepts:
OpsCon, acquisition, deployment,
support, retirement

System

System life-cycle concepts:
OpsCon, acquisition, deployment,
support, retirement

System
needs

System element life-cycle concepts:
OpsCon, acquisition, deployment,
support, retirement

System
element
needs

System
element

Analysis

Stakeholder
needs

Business
requirements

Business
requirements
specification
(BRS)

Business or mission
analysis process
(Section 4.1)

Stakeholder
requirements

Stakeholder
requirements
specification
(StRS)

Stakeholder needs
and requirements
definition Process
(Section 4.2)

System
requirements

System
requirements
specification
(SyRS)

System Architecture
requirements definition
process
process
(Section 4.3) (Section 4.4)

System element
requirements

System
element
requirements
specifications

System Architecture
requirements definition
process
process
(Section 4.3) (Section 4.4)

Analysis

Analysis

Analysis

Needs view

Requirements view

Figure 4.1 Transformation of needs into requirements. Reprinted with permission from Mike Ryan. All other rights reserved.

organization or enterprise, the concept of operations
(ConOps), and other organization strategic goals
and objectives from which business management
define business needs (aka mission needs). These
needs are supported by preliminary life cycle
concepts—acquisition concept, deployment con­
cept, operational concept (OpsCon), support con­
cept, and retirement concept—see Section 4.1.2.2
for a detailed description of the roles of the
ConOps and the OpsCon. Business needs are then
elaborated and formalized into business require­
ments, which are often captured in a Business
Requirements Specification (BRS).
•• Stakeholder needs and requirements definition
process—Using the enterprise‐level ConOps from the
acquiring enterprise and the system‐level preliminary

OpsCon from the development enterprise as guid­
ance, requirements engineers lead stakeholders from
business operations through a structured process to
elicit stakeholder needs (in the form of a refined
system‐level OpsCon and other life cycle con­
cepts). Stakeholder needs are then transformed by
requirements engineers into a formal set of stake­
holder requirements, which are often captured in a
Stakeholder Requirements Specification (StRS).
•• System requirements definition process—The stake­
holder requirements in the StRS are then transformed
by requirements engineers into system requirements,
which are often contained in a System Requirements
Specification (SyRS).
•• Architecture definition process—Alternative system
architectures are defined and one is selected.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Business or Mission Analysis Process

•• Design definition process—System elements are
defined in sufficient detail to enable implementa­
tion consistent with the selected system architecture.
•• System analysis process—Mathematical analysis,
modeling, and simulation are used to support the
other technical processes.
•• Implementation process—System elements are
realized to satisfy system requirements, architecture,
and design.
•• Integration process—System elements are combined
into a realized system.
•• Verification process—Evidence is provided that the
system, the system elements, and the work products
in the life cycle meet the specified requirements.
•• Transition process—The system moves into opera­
tions in a planned, orderly manner.
•• Validation process—Evidence is provided that the
system, the system elements, and the work products
in the life cycle will achieve their intended use in
the intended operational environment.
•• Operation process—The system is used.
•• Maintenance process—The system is sustained
during operations.
•• Disposal process—The system or system elements
are deactivated, disassembled, and removed from
operations.
4.1 Business or Mission Analysis
Process
4.1.1 Overview
4.1.1.1

Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,

[6.4.1.1] The purpose of the Business or Mission Analysis
process is to define the business or mission problem or
opportunity, characterize the solution space, and deter­
mine potential solution class(es) that could address a
problem or take advantage of an opportunity.

4.1.1.2 Description Business or mission analysis ini­
tiates the life cycle of the system of interest (SOI) by
defining the problem domain; identifying major stake­
holders; identifying environmental conditions and con­
straints that bound the solution domain; developing
preliminary life cycle concepts for acquisition, operations,
deployment, support, and retirement; and developing the

49

business requirements and validation criteria. Figure 4.2
is the IPO diagram for the business or mission analysis
process.
4.1.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
business or mission analysis process are listed in
Figure 4.2. Descriptions of each input and output are
provided in Appendix E.
4.1.1.4 Process Activities The business or mission
analysis process includes the following activities and
tasks:
•• Prepare for business or mission analysis.
–– Establish a strategy for business or mission anal­
ysis, including the need for and requirements of
any enabling systems, products, or services.
•• Define the problem or opportunity space.
–– Review identified gaps in the organization strategy
with respect to desired organization goals or
objectives.
–– Analyze the gaps across the trade space.
–– Describe the problems or opportunities underlying
the gaps.
–– Obtain agreement on the problem or opportunity
descriptions.
•• Characterize the solution space.
–– Nominate major stakeholders (individuals or
groups). Business owners nominate the major
stakeholders who are to be involved in the acqui­
sition, operation, support, and retirement of the
solution.
–– Define preliminary OpsCon. An OpsCon describes
how the system works from the operator’s per­
spective. The preliminary OpsCon summarizes the
needs, goals, and characteristics of the system’s
user and operator community. The OpsCon also
identifies the system context and system interfaces
(i.e., the operational environment; see Elaboration
for more detail).
–– Define other preliminary life cycle concepts. The
business owners identify preliminary life cycle
concepts in so far as they may wish to scope any
aspect of the acquisition, deployment, support,
and retirement of the solution.
–– Establish a comprehensive set of alternative
solution classes.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

50

Technical Processes

Controls

Inputs

Activities

Outputs

• Organization strategic plan
• ConOps
• Source documents
• Life cycle constraints
• Project constraints
• Stakeholder requirements
traceability

• Prepare for business or
mission analysis
• Define the problem or
opportunity space
• Characterize the solution
space
• Evaluate alternative solution
classes
• Manage the business or
mission analysis

• Business or mission
analysis strategy
• Major stakeholder
identification
• Preliminary life cycle
concepts
• Problem or opportunity
statement
• Business requirements
• Alternative solution classes
• Preliminary validation
criteria
• Preliminary MOE needs
• Preliminary MOE data
• Business requirements
traceability
• Business or mission
analysis record

Enablers
Figure 4.2 IPO diagram for business or mission analysis process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and Walden.
Usage per the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

•• Evaluate alternative solution classes.
–– Evaluate the set of alternative solution classes
and select the preferred class(es). Appropriate
modeling, simulation, and analytical techniques
help determine the feasibility and value of the
alternative candidate solutions.
–– Ensure that the preferred alternative solution
class(es) has been validated in the context of the
proposed business or mission strategy. Feedback
on feasibility, market factors, and alternatives is
also provided for use in completing the organiza­
tion strategy and further actions.
•• Manage the business or mission analysis.
–– Establish and maintain traceability of analysis
results, such as requirements and preliminary life
cycle concepts.
–– Provide baseline information for configuration
management.

4.1.2 Elaboration
4.1.2.1 Nominate Major Stakeholders Although the
detailed identification of stakeholders is undertaken in
the stakeholder needs and requirements definition pro­
cess, during business and mission analysis, the business
managers are responsible for nominating major stake­
holders and often for establishing a stakeholder board.
It is fundamentally a business management function to
ensure stakeholders are available and willing to con­
tribute to the system development—most stakeholders
are heavily occupied in business operations and must be
given permission to expend effort and resources on other
than their operational tasks.
4.1.2.2 ConOps and OpsCon ANSI/AIAA G‐043A‐
2012 states that the terms “concept of operations” and
“operational concept” are often used interchangeably but
notes that an important distinction exists in that each has

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Business or Mission Analysis Process

a separate purpose and is used to meet different ends.
This handbook uses these terms so that they are consis­
tent with ANSI/AIAA G‐043A‐2012 and ISO/IEC/IEEE
29148:2011, the same way in which they are used in
the US Department of Defense (DoD) and many other
defense forces.
ISO/IEC/IEEE 29148 describes the ConOps as
The ConOps, at the organization level, addresses the
leadership’s intended way of operating the organization.
It may refer to the use of one or more systems, as black
boxes, to forward the organization’s goals and objec­
tives. The ConOps document describes the organization’s
assumptions or intent in regard to an overall operation or
series of operations of the business with using the system
to be developed, existing systems, and possible future
systems. This document is frequently embodied in long‐
range strategic plans and annual operational plans. The
ConOps document serves as a basis for the organization to
direct the overall characteristics of the future business and
systems, for the project to understand its background, and
for the users of [ISO/IEC/IEEE 29148] to implement the
stakeholder requirements elicitation.

ISO/IEC/IEEE 29148 describes the OpsCon as
A System Operational Concept (OpsCon) document
describes what the system will do (not how it will do
it) and why (rationale). An OpsCon is a user‐oriented
document that describes system characteristics of the
to‐be‐delivered system from the user’s viewpoint. The
OpsCon document is used to communicate overall
quantitative and qualitative system characteristics to
the acquirer, user, supplier and other organizational
elements.

Both the ConOps and the OpsCon are prepared by
the organization that has the business need for the SOI.
The ConOps is developed by/for the leadership at the
enterprise level of the organization using the SOI. In
some acquisitions, the ConOps may not be formalized,
but rather implied by other business concepts and/or
strategies. The OpsCon is prepared at the business level.
Business management begins with the preparation of the
preliminary OpsCon, which summarizes business needs
from an operational perspective for the solution classes
that address the problem or opportunity. The preliminary
OpsCon is then elaborated and refined by business
operations into the OpsCon by engagement with the
nominated stakeholders during the stakeholder needs

51

and requirements definition process—the final OpsCon
therefore contains both the business needs and the stake­
holder needs. The OpsCon may be iteratively refined as
a result of feedback obtained through the conduct of the
system requirements definition and architecture defini­
tion processes.
4.1.2.3 Other Life Cycle Concepts The OpsCon is
just one of the life cycle concepts required to address
the stakeholder needs across the system life cycle.
Preliminary concepts are established in the business or
mission analysis process to the extent needed to define
the problem or opportunity space and characterize the
solution space. These concepts are further refined in the
stakeholder needs and requirements definition process.
In addition to the operational aspects, other related life
cycle concepts are required to address:
•• Acquisition concept—Describes the way the sys­
tem will be acquired including aspects such as
stakeholder engagement, requirements definition,
design, production, and verification. The supplier
enterprise(s) may need to develop more detailed
concepts for production, assembly, verification,
transport of system, and/or system elements.
•• Deployment concept—Describes the way the system
will be validated, delivered, and introduced into
operations, including deployment considerations
when the system will be integrated with other sys­
tems that are in operation and/or replace any systems
in operation.
•• Support concept—Describes the desired support
infrastructure and manpower considerations for sup­
porting the system after it is deployed. A support con­
cept would address operating support, engineering
support, maintenance support, supply support, and
training support.
•• Retirement concept—Describes the way the system
will be removed from operation and retired, includ­
ing the disposal of any hazardous materials used
in or resulting from the process and any legal
obligations—for example, regarding IP rights pro­
tection, any external financial/ownership interests,
and national security concerns.
4.1.2.4 Business Requirements and Validation
Specify business requirements—It is often helpful to
specify business requirements as part of the business and

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

52

Technical Processes

mission analysis process. Business requirements are
often contained in a BRS, which the Guide to the Business
Analysis Body of Knowledge (IIBA, 2009) calls the
business requirement document. The term “specifica­
tion” has some variation in use in various industries, but
it is used here to be synonymous with “document”—that
is, business requirements are captured in the BRS, stake­
holder requirements in the StRS, and system require­
ments in the SyRS.
Define business validation criteria The business
must define how it will know that the solution provided
will meet the OpsCon. Validation criteria establish criti­
cal and desired system performance—thresholds and
objectives for system performance parameters that are
critical for system success and those that are desired but
may be subject to compromise to meet the critical
parameters.

4.2 Stakeholder Needs and
Requirements Definition Process
4.2.1
4.2.1.1

Overview
Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,

[6.4.2.1] The purpose of the Stakeholder Needs and
Requirements Definition process is to define the stake­
holder requirements for a system that can provide the
capabilities needed by users and other stakeholders in a
defined environment.

4.2.1.2 Description Successful projects depend on
meeting the needs and requirements of the stakeholders
throughout the life cycle. A stakeholder is any entity
(individual or organization) with a legitimate interest
in the system. When nominating stakeholders, business
management will take into account all those who may be
affected by or able to influence the system—typically,
they would consider users, operators, organization
decision makers, parties to the agreement, regulatory
bodies, developing agencies, support organizations, and
society at large (within the context of the business and
proposed solution). When direct contact is not possible,
systems engineers find agents, such as marketing or non­
governmental organizations, to represent the concerns
of a class of stakeholders, such as consumers or future
generations.

After identifying the stakeholders, this process elicits
the stakeholder needs that correspond to a new or changed
capability or new opportunity. These needs are analyzed
and transformed into a set of stakeholder requirements
for the operation and effects of the solution and its inter­
action with the operational and enabling environments.
The stakeholder requirements are the primary reference
against which the operational capability is validated.
To achieve good results, systems engineers involve
themselves in nearly every aspect of a project, pay close
attention to interfaces where two or more systems or
system elements work together, and establish an inter­
action network with stakeholders and other organiza­
tional units of the organization. Figure 4.3 shows the
critical interactions for systems engineers.
The stakeholder requirements govern the system’s
development and are an essential factor in further defining
or clarifying the scope of the development project. If an
organization is acquiring the system, this process pro­
vides the basis for the technical description of the deliv­
erables in an agreement—typically in the form of a
system‐level specification and defined interfaces at the
system boundaries. Figure 4.4 is the IPO diagram for the
stakeholder needs and requirements definition process.
4.2.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
stakeholder needs and requirements definition process
are listed in Figure 4.4. Descriptions of each input and
output are provided in Appendix E.
4.2.1.4 Process Activities The stakeholder needs and
requirements definition process includes the following
activities:
•• Prepare for stakeholder needs and requirements
definition.
–– Determine the stakeholders or classes of stake­
holders who will participate with systems engi­
neering to develop and define the stakeholder
needs and translate these into system requirements,
phased throughout the entire life cycle. Capture
these results in the ConOps.
–– Determine the need for and requirements of any
enabling systems, products, or services.
•• Define stakeholder needs.
–– Elicit stakeholder needs from the identified
stakeholders.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Project
management
and control

Production
management

Product
assurance,
quality and
safety

Business
engineering and
procurement

Systems engineering
environment

Interfaces–involvement
interaction

Operations,
maintenance,
servicing

Stakeholders,
customers,
markets

Software/
hardware
engineering

Figure 4.3 Key SE interactions. From Stoewer (2005). Figure reprinted with permission from Heinz Stoewer. All other rights
reserved.
Controls

Inputs
• Source documents
• Project constraints
• Major stakeholders
identification
• Preliminary life cycle
concepts
• Problem or opportunity
statement
• Business requirements
• Alternative solution classes
• Preliminary validation
criteria
• Validated requirements
• Preliminary MOE needs
• Preliminary MOE data
• Business requirements
traceability
• Life cycle constraints
• Stakeholder needs
• System requirements
traceability

Activities
• Prepare for stakeholder
needs and requirements
definition
• Define stakeholder needs
• Develop the operational
concept and other life cycle
concepts
• Transform stakeholder
needs into stakeholder
requirements
• Analyze stakeholder
requirements
• Manage the stakeholder
needs and requirements
definition

Outputs
• Stakeholder needs and
requirements definition strategy
• Life cycle concepts
• System function
identification
• Stakeholder requirements
• Validation criteria
• MOE needs
• MOE data
• Stakeholder requirements
traceability
• Initial RVTM
• Stakeholder needs and
requirements definition
record

Enablers
Figure 4.4 IPO diagram for stakeholder needs and requirements definition process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by
Shortell and Walden. Usage per the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

54

Technical Processes

–– Prioritize the stakeholder needs to identify which
to focus on.
–– Specify the stakeholder needs.
•• Develop the operational concept and other life
cycle concepts.
–– Identify the expected set of operational scenarios
and associated capabilities, behaviors, and
responses of the system or solution and environ­
ments across the life cycle (in acquisition,
deployment, operations, support, and retire­
ment). The scenarios are built to define the life
cycle concept documents; the range of antici­
pated uses of system products; the intended oper­
ational environment and the systems’ impact on
the environment; and interfacing systems, plat­
forms, or products. Scenarios help identify
requirements that might otherwise be over­
looked. Social and organizational influences also
emerge from using scenarios.
–– Define the interactions of the system or solution
with the users and the operating, support, and
enabling environments.
•• Transform stakeholder needs into stakeholder
requirements.
–– Identify constraints on the solution (imposed by
agreements or interfaces with legacy or interoperat­
ing systems). The constraints need to be monitored
for any interface changes (external or internal) that
could alter the nature of the constraint.
–– Specify health, safety, security, environment,
assurance, and other stakeholder requirements
and functions that relate to critical qualities.
–– Specify stakeholder requirements, consistent
with scenarios, interactions, constraints, and crit­
ical qualities.
•• Analyze stakeholder requirements.
–– Define validation criteria for stakeholder require­
ments. Stakeholder validation criteria include
measures of effectiveness (MOEs) and measures
of suitability (MOSs), which are the “operational”
measures of success that are closely related to
the achievement of the mission or operational
objective being evaluated, in the intended opera­
tional environment under a specified set of con­
ditions (i.e., how well the solution achieves the
intended purpose). These measures reflect overall

customer/user satisfaction (e.g., performance,
safety, reliability, availability, maintainability, and
workload requirements).
–– Analyze the set of requirements for clarity, com­
pleteness, and consistency. Include review of the
analyzed requirements to the applicable stake­
holders to ensure the requirements reflect their
needs and expectations.
–– Negotiate modifications to resolve unrealizable
or impractical requirements.
•• Manage the stakeholder needs and requirements
definition.
–– Establish with stakeholders that their require­
ments are expressed correctly.
–– Record stakeholder requirements in a form
suitable for maintenance throughout the system
life cycle (and beyond for historical or archival
purposes).
–– Establish and maintain through the life cycle
a traceability of stakeholder needs and require­
ments (e.g., to the stakeholders, other sources,
organizational strategy, and business or mission
analysis results).
–– Provide baseline information for configuration
management.
4.2.2

Elaboration

Within the context of ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288, require­
ments (business, stakeholder, and system) are drivers for
the majority of the system life cycle processes. Depending
on the system development model, stakeholder require­
ments capture should be conducted nominally once near
the beginning of the development cycle or as a contin­
uous activity. Regardless, the reason for eliciting and ana­
lyzing requirements is the same—understand the needs
of the stakeholders well enough to support the architecture
definition and design definition processes.
4.2.2.1 Identify Stakeholders Systems engineers
engage with legitimate stakeholders of the system. The
major stakeholders at the business management level will
have been nominated during the business or mission anal­
ysis process—here, systems engineers are interested in
identifying stakeholders from the business operations level.
One of the biggest challenges in system development
is the identification of the set of stakeholders from whom

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Stakeholder Needs and Requirements Definition Process

requirements should be elicited. Customers and eventual
end users are relatively easy to identify, but regulatory
agencies and other interested parties that may reap the
consequences of the deployed system should also be
sought out and heard. Stakeholders can include the stake­
holders of interoperating systems and enabling systems
as these will usually impose constraints that need to
be identified and considered. In sustainable develop­
ment, this includes finding representation for future
generations.
4.2.2.2 Elicit Stakeholder Needs Determining stake­
holder needs requires the integration of a number of
disparate views, which may not necessarily be harmo­
nious. As the SE process is applied, a common paradigm
for examining and prioritizing available information and
determining the value of added information should be
created. Each of the stakeholder’s views of the needed
systems can be translated to a common top‐level system
description that is understood by all participants, and all
decision‐making activities recorded for future examina­
tion. Under some circumstances, it may not be practical
to elicit needs from the stakeholder but rather from the
marketing organization or other surrogates. There may be
stakeholders who oppose the system. These stakeholders
or detractors of the system are first considered in estab­
lishing consensus needs. Beyond this, they are addressed
through the risk management process, the threat analysis
of the system, or the system requirements for security,
adaptability, or resilience.
Systems engineering should support program and
project management in defining what must be done and
gathering the information, personnel, and analysis tools
to elaborate the business requirements. This includes
gathering stakeholder needs, system/project con­straints
(e.g., costs, technology limitations, and applicable
specifications/legal requirements), and system/project
“drivers,” such as capabilities of the competition, mili­
tary threats, and critical environments.
The outputs of the stakeholder needs and require­
ments definition process should be sufficient definition
of the business and stakeholder needs and requirements
to gain authorization and funding for program initiation
through the portfolio management process. The output
should also provide necessary technical definition to the
acquisition process to generate a request for proposal
(RFP) if the system is to be acquired through a contract
acquisition process or to gain authorization to develop

55

and market the system if market driven. These outputs
can be captured in life cycle concept documents (partic­
ularly the OpsCon) and the StRS, which often are used to
support the generation of a statement of work (SOW),
and/or an RFP, both of which are artifacts of the acquisi­
tion process. Contributing users rely on well‐defined
completion criteria to indicate the successful definition
of user and stakeholder needs:
•• User organizations have gained authorization for
new system acquisition.
•• Program development organizations have prepared
a SOW, StRS, and gained approval for new system
acquisition. If they are going to use support from
outside the company, they have issued an RFP and
selected a contractor.
•• Potential contractors have influenced the acquisition
needs, submitted a proposal, and have been selected
to develop and deliver the system.
•• If the system is market driven, the marketing group
has learned what consumers want to buy. For expen­
sive items (e.g., aircraft), they have obtained orders
for the new systems.
•• If the system is market and technology driven, the
development team has obtained approval to develop
the new system from the corporation.
Since requirements come from multiple sources, elic­
iting and capturing requirements constitutes a significant
effort on the part of the systems engineer. The OpsCon
describes the intended operation of the system to be
developed and helps the systems engineer understand the
context within which requirements need to be captured
and defined. Techniques for requirements elicitation
include interviews, focus groups, the Delphi method,
and soft systems methodology, to name a few. Trade‐off
analysis and simulation tools can also be used to evaluate
mission operational alternatives and select the desired
mission alternative. Tools for capturing and managing
requirements are many and varied.
The source requirements captured by carrying out this
activity are only a portion of the total stakeholder require­
ments. As such, source requirements will be expanded
by a number of activities designed to break down the
broad requirement statements and reveal the need for
additional clarification, which will lead to either revision
of the written source material or additional source docu­
ments, such as meeting minutes.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

56

Technical Processes

4.2.2.3 Initialize the Requirements Database It is
essential to establish a database of baseline require­
ments traceable to the source needs (and subsequently to
system requirements) to serve as a foundation for later
refinement and/or revision by subsequent activities in
the SE process. The requirements database must first be
populated with the source documents that provide the
basis for the total set of system requirements that will
govern its design.
4.2.2.4 Develop the Life Cycle Concepts The word
“scenario” is often used to describe a single thread of
behavior; in other cases, it describes a superset of many
single threads operating concurrently. Scenarios and
what‐if thinking are essential tools for planners who
must cope with the uncertainty of the future. Scenario
thinking can be traced back to the writings of early
philosophers, such as Plato and Seneca (Heijden et al.,
2002). As a strategic planning tool, scenario techniques
have been employed by military strategists throughout
history. Building scenarios serves as a methodology for
planning and decision making in complex and uncertain
environments. The exercise makes people think in a
creative way, observations emerge that reduce the chances
of overlooking important factors, and the act of creating
the scenarios enhances communications within and bet­
ween organizations. Scenario building is an essentially
human activity that may involve interviews with opera­
tors of current/similar systems, potential end users, and
meetings of an Interface Working Group (IFWG). The
results of this exercise can be captured in many graphical
forms using modeling tools and simulations.
Creation or upgrade of a system shares the same
uncertainty regarding future use and emergent properties
of the system. The stakeholder needs and requirements
definition process captures the understanding of stake­
holder needs in a series of life cycle concept documents,
each focused on a specific life cycle stage: acquisition
concept, deployment concept, OpsCon, support concept,
and retirement concept. Each of these categories of life
cycle concepts is discussed in Section 4.1.2.3. A primary
goal of a concept document is to capture, early in the
system life cycle, an implementation‐free understanding
of stakeholder needs by defining what is needed, without
addressing how to satisfy the need. It captures behavioral
characteristics required of the system in the context of
other systems with which it interfaces, and captures the
manner in which people will interact with the system for

which the system must provide capabilities. Under­
standing these operational needs typically produces:
•• A source of specific and derived requirements
that meet the needs and objectives of the customer
and user
•• Invaluable insight for SE and designers as they define
design, develop, verify, and validate the system
•• Diminished risk of latent system defects in the
delivered operational systems
If the system is for a military customer, there may
be several required views of the system driven by archi­
tectural frameworks. These are defined, for example, in
the US Department of Defense Architecture Frame­
work (DoDAF, 2010) and in the UK Ministry of
Defense Architecture Framework (MoDAF, n.d.)
(OMG, 2013a).
The primary objective is to communicate with the end
user of the system during the early specification stages to
ensure that stakeholder needs (particularly the opera­
tional needs) are clearly understood and the rationale
for performance requirements is incorporated into the
decision mechanism for later inclusion in the system
requirements and lower‐level specifications. Interviews
with operators of current/similar systems, potential users,
interface meetings, IPO diagrams, functional flow block
diagrams (FFBD), timeline charts, and N2 charts provide
valuable stakeholder input toward establishing a concept
consistent with stakeholder needs. Other objectives are
as follows:
1. To provide traceability between operational needs
and the captured source requirements
2. To establish a basis for requirements to support
the system over its life, such as personnel require­
ments, support requirements, etc.
3. To establish a basis for verification planning,
system‐level verification requirements, and any
requirements for environmental simulators
4. To generate operational analysis models to test the
validity of external interfaces between the system
and its environment, including interactions with
external systems
5. To provide the basis for computation of system
capacity, behavior under‐/overload, and mission‐
effectiveness calculations

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

System Requirements Definition Process

6. To validate requirements at all levels and to
discover implicit requirements overlooked from
other sources
Since the preliminary life cycle concepts have provided
a broad description of system behavior, a starting point
for further developing the concept is to begin by identi­
fying outputs generated by external systems (modified as
appropriate by passing through the natural system envi­
ronment), which act as stimuli to the SOI and cause it to
take specified actions and produce outputs, which in turn
are absorbed by external systems. These single threads of
behavior eventually cover every aspect of operational
performance, including logistical modes of operation,
operation under designated conditions, and behavior
required when experiencing mutual interference with
multiobject systems.
Aggregation of these single threads of behavior repre­
sents a dynamic statement of what the system is required
to do and how it is to be acquired, deployed, operated,
supported, and retired. No attempt is made at this stage
to define a complete OpsCon or to allocate functions to
hardware or software elements (this comes later during
architectural design). The life cycle concepts are essen­
tially definitions of the functional concepts and rationale
from the stakeholder perspective. The life cycle concepts
are further developed as follows:
1. Start with the source operational requirements;
deduce a set of statements describing the higher‐
level, mission‐oriented needs.
2. Review the system needs with stakeholders and
record the conflicts.
3. Define and model the operational boundaries.
4. For each model, generate a context diagram to rep­
resent the model boundary.
5. Identify all of the possible types of observable input
and output events that can occur between the system
and its interacting external systems.
6. If the inputs/outputs are expected to be signifi­
cantly affected by the environment between the
system and the external systems, add concurrent
functions to the IPO diagram to represent these
transformations and add input and output events
to the database to account for the differences in
event timing between when an output is emitted
and when an input is received.

57

7. Record the existence of a system interface bet­
ween the system and the environment or external
system.
8. For each class of interaction between a part of the
system and an external system, create a functional
flow diagram to model the sequence of interac­
tions as triggered by the stimuli events generated
by the external systems.
9. Add information to trace the function timing
from performance requirements and simulate the
timing of the functional flow diagrams to con­
firm operational correctness or to expose
dynamic inconsistencies. Review results with
users and operational personnel.
10. Develop timelines, approved by end users, to
supplement the source requirements.
4.2.2.5 Generate the StRS A draft StRS should be
generated to formally represent the stakeholder require­
ments. The StRS should be traceable to the stakeholder
needs and to the BRS.

4.3 System Requirements Definition
Process
4.3.1
4.3.1.1

Overview
Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,

[6.4.3.1] The purpose of the System Requirements
Definition process is to transform the stakeholder, user‐
oriented view of desired capabilities into a technical view
of a solution that meets the operational needs of the user.

4.3.1.2 Description System requirements are the
foundation of the system definition and form the basis
for the architecture, design, integration, and verification.
Each requirement carries a cost. It is therefore essential
that a complete but minimum set of requirements be
established from defined stakeholder requirements early
in the project life cycle. Changes in requirements later in
the development cycle can have a significant cost impact
on the project, possibly resulting in cancellation.
The system requirements definition process gener­
ates a set of system requirements from the supplier’s
perspective using the stakeholder requirements that
reflect the user’s perspective as the basis. The system

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

58

Technical Processes

requirements specify the system characteristics, attrib­
utes, functions, and performance that will meet the
stakeholder requirements.
Requirements definition is both iterative and recursive
(see Section 3.4.1). According to ISO/IEC/IEEE 29148,
Requirements engineering (2011),

system in the system structure to arrive at a more detailed
or mature set of outcomes. Such an approach adds value
to successive systems in the system structure.

When the application of the same process or set of
processes is repeated on the same level of the system,
the application is referred to as iterative. Iteration is not
only appropriate but also expected. New information
is created by the application of a process or set of
processes. Typically this information takes the form of
questions with respect to requirements, analyzed risks
or opportunities. Such questions should be resolved
before completing the activities of a process or set of
processes.

Thus, iteration between this process and others is
expected as more information is available and analysis
is performed. This process continues to be recursively
applied to define the requirements for each system element.
The output of the process must be compared for trace­
ability to and consistency with the stakeholder require­
ments, without introducing implementation biases, before
being used to drive the architecture definition process.
The system requirements definition process adds the ver­
ification criteria to the defined system requirements.
Figure 4.5 is the IPO diagram for the system requirements
definition process.

When the same set of processes or the same set of pro­
cess activities are applied to successive levels of system
elements within the system structure, the application
form is referred to as recursive. The outcomes from one
application are used as inputs to the next lower (or higher)

4.3.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
system requirements definition process are listed in
Figure 4.5. Descriptions of each input and output are
provided in Appendix E.
Controls

Inputs
• Life cycle concepts
• System function
identification
• Stakeholder requirements
• Stakeholder requirements
traceability
• Initial RVTM
• Architecture traceability
• Final RVTM
• Life cycle constraints

Activities
• Prepare for system
requirements definition
• Define system
requirements
• Analyze system
requirements
• Manage system
requirements

Outputs
• System requirements
definition strategy
• System function definition
• System requirements
• System functional interface
identification
• Verification criteria
• MOP needs
• MOP data
• System requirements
traceability
• Updated RVTM
• System requirements
definition record

Enablers
Figure 4.5 IPO diagram for the system requirements definition process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and
Walden. Usage per the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

System Requirements Definition Process

4.3.1.4 Process Activities The system requirements
definition process includes the following activities:
•• Prepare for system requirements definition.
–– Establish the approach for defining the system
requirements. This includes system requirements
methods, tools, and the need for and requirements
of any enabling systems, products, or services.
–– In conjunction with the architecture definition
process, determine the system boundary, includ­
ing the interfaces, that reflects the operational sce­
narios and expected system behaviors. This task
includes identification of expected interactions
of the system with systems external to the system
(control) boundary as defined in negotiated inter­
face control documents (ICDs).
•• Define system requirements.
–– Identify and define the required system functions.
These functions should be kept implementation
independent, not imposing additional design con­
straints. Define conditions or design factors that
facilitate and foster efficient and cost‐effective life
cycle functions (e.g., acquisition, deployment,
operation, support, and retirement). Also, include
the system behavior characteristics.
–– Identify the stakeholder requirements or orga­
nizational limitations that impose unavoidable
constraints on the system and capture those
constraints.
–– Identify the critical quality characteristics that
are relevant to the system, such as safety, secu­
rity, reliability, and supportability.
–– Identify the technical risks that need to be
accounted for in the system requirements.
–– Specify system requirements, consistent with
stakeholder requirements, functional boundaries,
functions, constraints, critical performance mea­
sures, critical quality characteristics, and risks.
System requirements may be captured in the
SyRS. Additionally, a documentation tree may
be developed to define the hierarchy of system
definition products being developed. The doc­
umentation tree evolves with the interaction of
the system requirements definition, architec­
ture definition, and design definition processes.
Capture the associated rationale, as the require­
ments are specified.

59

•• Analyze system requirements.
–– Analyze the integrity of the system require­
ments to ensure that each requirement or set
of requirements possess overall integrity. (See
Section 4.3.2.2 for characteristics of a good
requirement or set of requirements.)
–– Provide analysis results to applicable stake­
holders to ensure that the specified system
requirements adequately reflect the stakeholder
requirements.
–– Negotiate modifications to resolve issues identi­
fied in the requirements.
–– Define verification criteria—critical performance
measures that enable the assessment of technical
achievement. System verification criteria include
measures of performance (MOPs) and technical
performance measures (TPMs), which are the
“implementation” measures of success that should
be traceable to the MOEs and MOSs (operational
perspective) with the relationships defined.
•• Manage system requirements.
–– Ensure agreement among key stakeholders that
the requirements adequately reflect the stake­
holder intentions.
–– Establish and maintain traceability between the
system requirements and the relevant elements
of the system definition (e.g., stakeholder
require­
ments, architecture elements, interface
definitions, analysis results, verification methods
or techniques, and allocated, decomposed, and
derived requirements.)
–– Maintain throughout the system life cycle the set
of system requirements together with the associ­
ated rationale, decisions, and assumptions.
–– Provide baseline information for configuration
management.
4.3.2

Elaboration

This section elaborates and provides “how‐to” informa­
tion on the requirements analysis and management. Other
key information on requirements can be found in ISO/
IEC TR 19760, Systems engineering—A guide to the
application of ISO/IEC 15288 (2003), and ISO/IEC/IEEE
29148, Requirements engineering (2011), and in EIA
632, Standard—Processes for engineering a system

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

60

Technical Processes

(ANSI/EIA, 2003), Requirements 14, 15, and 16, and
Annex C3.1 a, b, and c.
4.3.2.1 Requirements Definition and Analysis
Concepts Requirements definition and analysis, like
the set of SE processes, is an iterative activity in which
new requirements are identified and constantly refined as
the concept develops and additional details become
known. The requirements are analyzed, and deficiencies
and cost drivers are identified and reviewed with the
customer to establish a requirements baseline for the
project.
An objective of requirements analysis is to provide an
understanding of the interactions between the various
functions and to obtain a balanced set of requirements
based on user objectives. Requirements are not devel­
oped in a vacuum. An essential part of the requirements
development process is the OpsCon, the implicit design
concept that accompanies it, and associated demands of
relevant technology. Requirements come from a variety of
sources, including the customer/users, regulations/codes,
and corporate entities.
This complex process employs performance anal­
ysis, trade studies, constraint evaluation, and cost–
benefit analysis. System requirements cannot be
established without determining their impact (achiev­
ability) on lower‐level elements. Therefore, require­
ments definition and analysis is an iteration and
balancing process that works both “top‐down” (called
allocation and flowdown) and “bottom‐up.” Once the
top‐level set of system requirements has been
established, it is necessary to allocate and flow them
down to successively lower levels. As the allocation
and flowdown process is repeated, it is essential that
traceability be maintained to ensure that all system‐
level requirements are satisfied in the resulting design.
The resulting requirements database usually contains
many attributes for each requirement and is also used
in verification. Although it is an objective to avoid
requirements that constrain or define aspects of the
system implementation, it is not always possible. There
are often necessary constraints that need to be reflected.
This includes the following:
•• Standards—Identify standards required to meet
quality or design considerations imposed as defined
stakeholder requirements or derived to meet organi­
zation, industry, or domain requirements.

•• Utilization environments—Identify the utilization
environments and all environmental factors (natural
or induced) that may affect system performance,
impact human comfort or safety, or cause human
error for each of the operational scenarios envisioned
for system use.
•• Essential design considerations—Identify design
considerations including human systems integration
(e.g., manpower, personnel, training, environment,
safety, occupational health, survivability, habitability),
system security requirements (e.g., information
assurance, antitamper provisions), and potential
environmental impact.
•• Design constraints—Identify design constraints
including physical limitations (e.g., weight, form/fit
factors), manpower, personnel, and other resource
constraints on operation of the system and defined
interfaces with host platforms and interacting sys­
tems external to the system boundary, including
supply, maintenance, and training infrastructures.
4.3.2.2 Characteristics and Attributes of Good
Requirements In defining requirements, care should
be exercised to ensure the requirement is appropriately
crafted. The following characteristics should be consid­
ered for every requirement based on ISO/IEC/IEEE
29148, Systems and software engineering—Life cycle
processes—Requirements engineering (2011), and the
INCOSE Guide for Writing Requirements (INCOSE
RWG, 2012):
•• Necessary—Every requirement generates extra
effort in the form of processing, maintenance, and
verification. Only necessary requirements should
therefore be included in specifications. Unnecessary
requirements are of two varieties: (i) unnecessary
specification of design, which should be left to the
discretion of the designer, and (ii) a redundant
requirement covered in some other combination of
requirements.
•• Implementation independent—Customer require­
ments may be imposed at any level they desire; how­
ever, when customer requirements specify design, it
should be questioned. A proper requirement should
deal with the entity being specified as a “black box”
by describing what transformation is to be performed
by the “box.” The requirement should specify “what”

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

System Requirements Definition Process

is to be done at that level, not “how” it is to be done
at that level.
•• Unambiguous—Requirements must convey what is
to be done to the next level of development. Its key
purpose is to communicate. Is the requirement clear
and concise? Is it possible to interpret the require­
ment in multiple ways? Are the terms defined?
Does the requirement conflict with or contradict
another requirement? Each requirement statement
should be written to address one and only one con­
cept. Requirements with “and,” “or,” “commas,” or
other forms of redundancy can be difficult to verify
and should be avoided as it can be difficult to
ensure all personnel have a common under­
standing. Requirements must therefore be written
with extreme care. The language used must be clear,
exact, and in sufficient detail to meet all reasonable
interpretations. A glossary should be used to pre­
cisely define often‐used terms or terms, such as
“process,” that could have multiple interpretations.
•• Complete—The stated requirement should be
complete and measurable and not need further
amplification. The stated requirement should pro­
vide sufficient capability or characteristics.
•• Singular—The requirement statement should be
of only one requirement and should not be a
combination of requirements or more than one
function or constraint.
•• Achievable—The requirement must be technically
achievable within constraints and requires advances
in technology within acceptable risk. It is best if
the implementing developer participate in require­
ments definition. The developer should have the
expertise to assess the achievability of the require­
ments. In the case of items to be subcontracted,
the expertise of potential subcontractors is very
valuable in the generation of the requirements.
Additionally, participation by manufacturing and
customers/users can help ensure achievable require­
ments. When it is not possible to have the right mix
of developer, subcontractor, and/or manufacturing
expertise during the requirements generation, it is
important to have their review at the first point
possible to ensure achievability.
•• Verifiable—Each requirement must be verified at
some level by one of the four standard methods
(inspection, analysis, demonstration, or test). A

61

customer may specify, “The range shall be as long
as possible.” This is a valid but unverifiable require­
ment. This type of requirement is a signal that a
trade study is needed to establish a verifiable
maximum range requirement. Each verification
requirement should be verifiable by a single method.
A requirement requiring multiple methods to verify
should be broken into multiple requirements. There
is no problem with one method verifying multiple
requirements; however, it indicates a potential for
consolidating requirements. When the system hier­
archy is properly designed, each level of specifica­
tion has a corresponding level of verification
during the verification stage. If element specifica­
tions are required to appropriately specify the
system, element verification should be performed.
•• Conforming—In many instances, there are appli­
cable government, industry, and product standards,
specifications, and interfaces with which compli­
ance is required. An example might be additional
requirements placed on new software developments
for possible reusability. Another might be standard
test interface connectors for certain product classes.
In addition, the individual requirements should con­
form to the organization’s standard template and
style for writing requirements—when all require­
ments within the same organization have the same
look and feel, each requirement is easier to write,
understand, and review.
Note: ISO/IEC/IEEE 29148 uses the term “consistent” instead of “conforming,” stating that the
requirement must be free of conflicts with other
requirements. While that is correct, a requirement
cannot, in and of itself, be consistent—consistency is
more correctly a characteristic of the set of requirements (as described in the following paragraph).

In addition to the characteristics of individual require­
ments, the characteristics of a set of requirements as a
whole should be addressed to ensure that the set of
requirements collectively provides for a feasible solution
that meets the stakeholder intentions and constraints.
These include:
•• Complete—The set of requirements contains every­
thing pertinent to the definition of system or system
element being specified.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

62

Technical Processes

•• Consistent—The set of requirements is consistent
in that the requirements are not contradictory nor
duplicated. Terms and abbreviations are used con­
sistently in all requirements, in accordance with the
glossary.
•• Feasible/affordable—The set of requirements can
be satisfied by a solution that is obtainable within
LCC, schedule, and technical constraints.
Note: ISO/IEC/IEEE 29148 uses the term
“affordable” instead of “feasible,” stating that
the set of requirements are feasible within the life
cycle constraints of cost, schedule, technical,
and regulatory. The INCOSE Guide for Writing
Requirements (INCOSE RWG, 2012) includes the
word “feasible,” stating that “Feasible/Affordable
is a more appropriate title for this characteristic
of the requirement set.”

•• Bounded—The set of requirements define the
required scope for the solution to meet the stake­
holder needs. Consequently, all necessary require­
ments must be included; irrelevant requirements
must be excluded.
In addition to the characteristics listed above, indi­
vidual requirement statements may have a number of
attributes attached to them (either as fields in a database
or through relationships with other artifacts):
•• Trace to parent—A child requirement is one that
has been derived or decomposed from the parent—
the achievement of all the children requirements
will lead to the achievement of the parent require­
ment. Each of the children requirements must be
able to be traced to its parent requirement (and
thence to any antecedent requirement and ulti­
mately to the system need/mission).
•• Trace to source—Each requirement must be able to
be traced to its source—this is different from tracing
to a parent because it identifies where the require­
ment came from and/or how it was arrived at (rather
than which other requirement is its parent).
•• Trace to interface definition—The interactions bet­
ween two systems are described in interface defini­
tions that are often contained in a document that has
a title such as an ICD. The interface requirements
contained in each of the interacting systems will

include reference to where the interaction is
defined. This attribute provides a link trace between
any of the interface requirements to where the inter­
action is defined.
•• Trace to peer requirements—This attribute links
requirements that are related to each other (other
than parent/child) at the same level. Peer require­
ments may be related for a number of reasons, such
as the following: they may be in conflict, or code­
pendent, or bundled, or a complimentary interface
requirement of another system to which the system
has an interface.
•• Trace to verification method—This could be a
simple statement of the way in which the require­
ment is to be verified (inspection, demonstration,
test, analysis, simulation), or it could be a more
elaborate statement that effectively provides the
outline of an appropriate test plan.
•• Trace to verification requirement(s)—The verifica­
tion method for each requirement simply states the
planned method of verification (inspection, demon­
stration, test, analysis, simulation). In addition to
stating the verification method, some organizations
write a set of verification requirements in addition
to the system requirements. This is beneficial as it
forces the systems engineer to consider how each
requirement is to be verified and in doing so helps
identify and remove requirements that are not
verifiable.
•• Trace to verification results—The results of each
verification will most often be contained in a sepa­
rate document. This attribute traces each require­
ment to the associated verification results.
•• Requirements verification status—It is useful to
include an attribute that indicates whether the
requirement has been verified or not.
•• Requirements validation status—Requirements
validation as the process of ensuring requirements
and sets of requirements meet the rules and charac­
teristics in the guide. Some organizations include
an attribute field “requirement validated” to indi­
cate whether the individual requirement has been
validated.
•• Priority—This is how important the requirement is to
the stakeholder. It may not be a critical requirement
(i.e., one the system must possess or it won’t work
at all), but simply something that the stakeholder(s)

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

System Requirements Definition Process

holds very dear. Priority may be characterized in
terms of a level (1, 2, 3 or high, medium, low). Priority
may be inherited from a parent requirement.
•• Criticality—A critical requirement is one that the
system must achieve or the system cannot function
at all—perhaps can be viewed as one of the set of
minimum essential requirements. Criticality may
be characterized in terms of a level (1, 2, 3 or major,
medium, minor). Criticality may be inherited from
a parent requirement.
•• Risk—This is the risk that the requirement cannot be
achieved within technology, schedule, and budget.
For example, the requirement may be possible tech­
nically (i.e., the requirement may be feasible) but
have risk of achievement within available budget
and schedule. Risk may be characterized in terms
of a level (e.g., high, medium, low). Risk may be
inherited from a parent requirement.
•• Key driving requirement (KDR)—A KDR is a
requirement that, to implement, can have a large
impact on cost or schedule. A KDR can be of any pri­
ority or criticality—knowing the impact a KDR has
on the design allows better management of require­
ments. When under schedule or budget pressure, a
KDR that is low priority or low criticality may be
a candidate for deletion.
•• Owner—This is the person or element of the orga­
nization that has the right to say something about
this requirement. The owner could be the source but
they are two different attributes.
•• Rationale—Rationale defines why the requirement
is needed and other information relevant to better
understand the reason for and intent of the require­
ment. Rationale can also define any assumptions
that were made when writing the requirement, what
design effort drove the requirement, the source of
any numbers in the requirement, and note how and
why a requirement is constrained (if indeed it is so).
•• Applicability—This field may be used by an orga­
nization that has a family of similar product lines to
identify the applicability of the requirement (e.g., to
product line, region, or country).
•• Type—It is often useful to attach to each require­
ment an attribute of type. While each organiza­
tion will define types based on how they may wish
to organize their requirements, examples of type
include input, output, external interfaces, reliability,

63

availability, maintainability, accessibility, environ­
mental conditions, ergonomic, safety, security,
facility, transportability, training, documentation,
testing, quality provision, policy and regulatory,
compatibility with existing systems, standards and
technical policies, conversion, growth capacity, and
installation. The type field is most useful because
it allows the requirements database to be viewed by
a large number of designers and stakeholders for a
wide range of uses.
More detail on writing text‐based requirements can
be found in the INCOSE Guide for Writing Requirements
(INCOSE RWG, 2012), which focuses on the writing
of requirements and addresses the characteristics of
individual requirement statements, the characteristics of
sets of requirements, the attributes of individual require­
ment statements, and the rules for individual require­
ment statements.
4.3.2.3 Define, Derive, and Refine Functional/
Performance Requirements At the beginning of the
project, SE is concerned primarily with user require­
ments analysis—leading to the translation of user needs
into basic functions and a quantifiable set of perfor­
mance requirements that can be translated into design
requirements.
Defining, deriving, and refining functional and
performance requirements apply to the total system over
its life cycle, including its support requirements. These
requirements need to be formally captured in a manner
that defines the functions and interfaces and character­
izes system performance such that they can be flowed
down to hardware and software designers. This is a key
SE activity and is the primary focus through System
Requirements Review (SRR). During the requirements
analysis, the support from most other disciplines (e.g.,
software, hardware, manufacturing, quality, verification,
specialty) is necessary to ensure a complete, feasible,
and accurate set of requirements that consider all
necessary life cycle factors of the system definition. The
customer is also a key stakeholder and validates the work
as it progresses.
Establishing a total set of system requirements is
a complex, time‐consuming task involving nearly all
project areas in an interactive effort. It must be done
early, since it forms the basis for all design, manu­
facturing, verification, operations, maintenance, and

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

64

Technical Processes

retirement efforts and therefore determines the cost and
schedule of the project. The activity is iterative for each
stage, with continuous feedback as the level of design
detail increases, and flows from the life cycle concepts,
particularly the OpsCon.
The result of the system requirements definition
process should be a baseline set of complete, accurate,
nonambiguous system requirements, recorded in the
requirements database, accessible to all parties, and
captured in an approved, released SyRS.
4.3.2.4 Define Other Nonfunctional Requirements
The life cycle concepts will also suggest requirements
that are those dealing with operational conditions
(e.g., safety; system security; reliability, availability, and
maintainability; human systems integration, environ­
mental engineering—see Chapter 10), as well as life
cycle constraints (e.g., maintenance, disposal) that will
strongly influence the definition of the solution
elements.
4.3.2.5 Generate the SyRS The SyRS—which is
often called the System Specification—is a baseline set
of complete, accurate, nonambiguous system require­
ments, recorded in the requirements database and
accessible to all parties. To be nonambiguous, require­
ments must be broken down into constituent parts in a
traceable hierarchy such that each individual require­
ment statement is:
•• Clear, unique, consistent, stand‐alone (not grouped),
and verifiable
•• Traceable to an identified source requirement
•• Not redundant, nor in conflict with, any other
known requirement
•• Not biased by any particular implementation
These objectives may not be achievable using source
requirements. Often, requirements analysis is required
to resolve potential conflicts and redundancies and to
further decompose requirements so that each applies
only to a single system function. Use of an automated
requirements database will greatly facilitate this effort,
but is not explicitly required.
During the system requirements definition process,
it is often necessary to generate a “snapshot” report of
clarified system requirements. To aid this process, it may

be desirable to create a set of clarified requirement objects
in the requirements database with information providing
traceability from their corresponding originating require­
ment. Clarified requirements may be grouped as functional,
performance, constraining, and nonfunctional.
4.4

Architecture Definition Process

4.4.1
4.4.1.1

Overview
Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,

[6.4.4.1] The purpose of the Architecture Definition
process is to generate system architecture alternatives, to
select one or more alternative(s) that frame stakeholder
concerns and meet system requirements, and to express
this in a set of consistent views.

4.4.1.2 Description System architecture and design
activities enable the creation of a global solution based
on principles, concepts, and properties logically related
and consistent with each other. The solution architecture
and design have features, properties, and characteristics
satisfying, as far as possible, the problem or opportunity
expressed by a set of system requirements (traceable
to mission/business and stakeholder requirements) and
life cycle concepts (e.g., operational, support) and are
implementable through technologies (e.g., mechanics,
electronics, hydraulics, software, services, procedures).
In this handbook, architecture and design activities are
described as two separate processes to show that they
are based on different and complementary notions.
System architecture is more abstract, conceptualization
oriented, global, focused to achieve the mission and
OpsCon of the system, and focused on high‐level struc­
ture in systems and system elements. It addresses the
architectural principles, concepts, properties, and charac­
teristics of the SOI. System design is more technology
oriented through physical, structural, environmental, and
operational properties forcing decisions for implementa­
tion by focusing on compatibility with technologies and
other design elements and feasibility of construction and
integration.
The architecture definition process aggregates and
deals with incremental insights obtained about the speci­
fied requirements and emergent properties and behaviors
of the system and system elements while managing suit­
ability, viability, and affordability. The design definition

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Architecture Definition Process

process uses the artifacts of the architecture definition
process (e.g., architecture description, feasibility analyses,
system balance trades, vetted requirements). For infor­
mation about the uses of architecture definition, refer to
ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010 (2011).
The architecture definition process is used to create
and establish alternative architectures through several
views and models, to assess the properties of these
alternatives (supported by the system analysis process),
and to select appropriate technological or technical
system elements that compose the system:
An effective architecture is as design‐agnostic as p­ ossible
to allow for maximum flexibility in the design trade
space. An effective architecture also ­
highlights and
­supports trade-offs for the Design Definition ­process and
possibly other processes such as Portfolio Management,
Project Planning, System Requirements Definition,
Verification, etc. (ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288:2015)

65

designers and specialists in the system domain. Also,
iteration between this process and others is expected as
more information is available and analysis is performed.
This process also continues to be recursively applied
to define the requirements for each system element.
Iteration and recursion are further described in
Section 4.3.1.2. Figure 4.6 is the IPO diagram for the
architecture definition process.
4.4.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
architecture definition process are listed in Figure 4.6.
Descriptions of each input and output are provided in
Appendix E.
4.4.1.4 Process Activities The architecture definition
process includes the following activities:

This process is iterative and requires the participation
of systems engineers or architects supported by relevant

•• Prepare for architecture definition.
–– Identify and analyze relevant market, industry,
stakeholder, organizational, business, operations,
mission, legal, and other information that will
help to understand the perspectives that will

Controls

Inputs
• Life cycle concepts
• System function definition
• System requirements
• System functional interface
identification
• System requirements
traceability
• Updated RVTM
• Design traceability
• Interface definition update
identification
• Life cycle constraints

Activities
• Prepare for architecture
definition
• Develop architecture
viewpoints
• Develop models and views
of candidate architectures
• Relate the architecture to
design
• Assess architecture
candidates
• Manage the selected
architecture

Outputs
• Architecture definition
strategy
• System architecture
description
• System architecture
rationale
• Documentation tree
• Preliminary interface
definition
• Preliminary TPM needs
• Preliminary TPM data
• Architecture traceability
• Architecture definition
record

Enablers
Figure 4.6 IPO diagram for the architecture definition process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and Walden.
Usage per the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

66

Technical Processes

guide the development of the architecture views
and models. This information is intended to
help build an understanding of the environment
for which the solution is needed in order to estab­
lish better insight into the stakeholder concerns.
–– In particular, analyze the system requirements
and tag nonfunctional requirements, that is, those
dealing with operational conditions (e.g., safety,
security, dependability, human factors, simplicity
of interfaces, environmental conditions), as well
as life cycle constraints (e.g., maintenance, dis­
posal, deployment) that will strongly influence
the definition of the solution elements.
–– Capture stakeholder concerns related to archi­
tecture. Usually, the stakeholder concerns focus
on expectations or constraints that span one or
more system life cycle stages. The concerns are
often related to critical quality characteristics to
the system that relate to those stages.
–– Establish the approach for defining the archi­
tecture. This includes an architecture roadmap
and strategy, as well as methods, modeling tech­
niques, tools, and the need for any enabling sys­
tems, products, or services. The approach should
also include the process requirements (e.g.,
measurement approach and methods), evalua­
tion (e.g., reviews and criteria), and necessary
coordination. Capture the evaluation criteria.
–– Ensure the enabling elements or services will be
available. As part of this task, plan for the need
and identify the requirements for the enabling
items.
•• Develop architecture viewpoints.
–– Based on the identified stakeholder concerns,
establish or identify the associated architecture
viewpoints, the supporting kinds of models that
facilitate the analysis and understanding of the
viewpoint, and relevant architecture frameworks
to support the development of the models and
views.
•• Develop models and views of candidate
architectures.
–– Select or develop supporting modeling tech­
niques and tools.
–– In conjunction with the system requirements
definition process, determine the system con­
text (i.e., how the SOI fits into the external

environment) and boundary, including the inter­
faces, that reflect the operational scenarios and
expected system behaviors. This task includes
identification of expected interactions of the
system with systems or other entities external to
the system (control) boundary as defined in
negotiated ICDs.
–– Determine which architectural entities (e.g.,
functions, input/output flows, system elements,
physical interfaces, architectural characteristics,
information/data elements, containers, nodes,
links, communication resources, etc.) address the
highest priority requirements (i.e., most important
stakeholder concerns, critical quality characteris­
tics, and other critical needs).
–– Allocate concepts, properties, characteristics,
behaviors, functions, and/or constraints that are
significant to architecture decisions of the system
to architectural entities.
–– Select, adapt, or develop models of the candidate
architectures of the system, such as logical and
physical models. It is sometimes neither necessary
nor sufficient to use logical and physical models.
The models to be used are those that best address
key stakeholder concerns. Logical models may
include functional, behavioral, or temporal
models; physical models may include structural
blocks, mass, layout, and other physical models
(see Section 9.1 for more information about
models).
–– Determine need for derived system requirements
induced by necessary added architectural entities
(e.g., functions, interfaces) and by structural dis­
positions (e.g., constraints, operational condi­
tions). Use the system requirements definition
process to define and formalize them.
–– Compose views from the models of the candidate
architectures. The views are intended to ensure
that the stakeholder concerns and critical require­
ments have been addressed.
–– For each system element that composes the
system, develop requirements corresponding to
allocation, alignment, and partitioning of archi­
tectural entities and system requirements to
system elements. To do this, invoke the stake­
holder needs and requirements definition process
and the system requirements definition process.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Architecture Definition Process

–– Analyze the architecture models and views for
consistency and resolve any issues identified.
Correspondence rules from frameworks can be
useful in this analysis (ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010,
2011).
–– Verify and validate the models by execution or
simulation, if modeling techniques and tools
permit, and with traceability matrix of OpsCon.
Where possible, use design tools to check their
feasibility and validity. As needed, implement
partial mock‐ups or prototypes, or use executable
architecture prototypes or simulators.
•• Relate the architecture to design.
–– Determine the system elements that reflect the
architectural entities. Since the architecture is
intended to be design‐agnostic, these system ele­
ments may be notional until the design evolves.
To do this, partition, align, and allocate architec­
tural entities and system requirements to system
elements. Establish guiding principles for the
system design and evolution. Sometimes, a “refer­
ence architecture” is created using these notional
system elements as a means to convey architec­
tural intent and to check for design feasibility.
–– Establish allocation matrices between architec­
tural entities using their relationships.
–– Perform interface definition for interfaces that are
necessary for the level of detail and understanding
of the architecture. The definition includes the
internal interfaces between the system elements
and the external interfaces with other systems.
–– Determine the design characteristics that relate
to the system elements and their architectural
entities, such as by mapping (see Section 4.5).
–– Determine need for derived system requirements
induced by necessary added architectural entities
(e.g., functions, interfaces) and by structural
dispositions (e.g., constraints, operational con­
ditions). Use the system requirements definition
process to formalize them.
–– For each system element that composes the par­
ent system, develop requirements correspond­
ing to allocation, alignment, and partitioning of
architectural entities and system requirements
to system elements. To do this, invoke the stake­
holder needs and requirements definition process
and the system requirements definition process.

67

•• Assess architecture candidates.
–– Using the architecture evaluation criteria, assess
the candidate architectures by applying the system
analysis, measurement, and risk management
processes.
–– Select the preferred architecture(s). This is done
by applying the decision management process.
•• Manage the selected architecture.
–– Capture and maintain the rationale for all selec­
tions among alternatives and decision for the
architecture, architecture framework(s), view­
points, kinds of models, and models of the
architecture.
–– Manage the maintenance and evolution of the
architecture, including the architectural entities,
their characteristics (e.g., technical, legal, eco­
nomical, organizational, and operational entities),
models, and views. This includes concordance,
completeness, and changes due to environment
or context changes, technological, implementa­
tion, and operational experiences. Allocation and
traceability matrices are used to analyze impacts
onto the architecture. The present process is
performed at any time evolutions of the system
occur.
–– Establish a means for the governance of the
architecture. Governance includes the roles,
responsibilities, authorities, and other control
functions.
–– Coordinate review of the architecture to achieve
stakeholder agreement. The stakeholder require­
ments and system requirements can serve as
references.
Common approaches and tips:
•• A function (e.g., to move) and its state of execution/
operational mode (e.g., moving) are similar but two
complementary views. Consider a behavioral model
of the system that transits from an operational mode
to another one.
4.4.2

Elaboration

4.4.2.1 Architecture Representation The notion of
system is abstract, but it is a practical means to create,
design, or redesign products, services, or enterprises.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

68

Technical Processes

A system is one solution that could address/answer
a problem or an opportunity; there may be several solu­
tions to address the same problem or opportunity. The
solution may be more or less complex, and the notion
of system is useful to engineer complex solutions. A
complex solution cannot be apprehended with a single
view or model because of the number of characteristics
or properties. These last are grouped reflecting typol­
ogies of data, and each type of data/characteristics is
structured. The set of different types and interrelated
“structures” can be understood as THE architecture of
the system. The majority of interpretations of system
architecture are based on the fairly intangible notion of
structure.
Therefore, the system architecture is formally repre­
sented with sets of architectural entities such as
functions, function flows, interfaces, resource flow
items, information/data elements, physical elements,
containers, nodes, links, communication resources, etc.
These architectural entities may possess architectural
characteristics such as dimensions, environmental resil­
ience, availability, robustness, learnability, execution
efficiency, mission effectiveness, etc. The entities are
not independent but interrelated by the means of
relationships.
4.4.2.2 Architecture Description of the System ISO/
IEC/IEEE 42010 specifies the normative features of
architecture frameworks, viewpoints, and views as they
pertain to architecture description. Viewpoints and views
are sometimes specified in architecture frameworks
such as Zachman (1987), DoDAF (2010), MoDAF (n.d.),
The Open Group Architecture Framework (TOGAF), etc.
Views are usually generated from models. Many SE prac­
tices use logical and physical models (or views) for mod­
eling the system architecture. The architecture definition
process includes also the possible usage of other view­
points and views to represent how the system architecture
addresses stakeholder concerns, for example, cost models,
process models, rule models, ontological models, belief
models, project models, capability models, data models,
etc. Maier and Rechtin (2009) provide another view of
the system architecture development process. Refer to
Chapter 9 for a more detailed treatment of models.
A viewpoint is intended to address a particular stake­
holder concern (or set of closely related concerns). The
viewpoint will specify the model kinds to be used in
developing an architectural view that depicts how the

architecture addresses that concern (or set of concerns).
The viewpoint also specifies the ways in which the
model(s) should be generated and how the models are used
to compose the view.
An architecture framework contains standardized
viewpoints, view templates, metamodels, model tem­
plates, etc. that facilitate the development of the views
contained in an architecture description. ISO/IEC/IEEE
42010 specifies the necessary features of an architecture
framework.
4.4.2.3 Emergent Properties Emergence is the prin­
ciple that whole entities exhibit properties, which are
meaningful only when attributed to the whole, not to its
parts. Every model of a human activity system exhibits
properties as a whole entity that derive from its compo­
nent activities and their structure, but cannot be reduced
to them (Checkland, 1998).
System elements interact between themselves and
can create desirable or undesirable phenomena called
“emergent properties,” such as inhibition, interference,
resonance, or reinforcement of any property. Definition
of the architecture of the system includes an analysis of
interactions between system elements in order to prevent
undesirable properties and reinforce desirable ones.
The notion of emergent property is used during
architecture and design to highlight necessary derived
functions and internal physical or environmental con­
straints. Corresponding derived requirements should be
added to system requirements baseline when they impact
the SOI.
4.4.2.4 Architecture in Product Lines The archi­
tecture plays a very important role in a product line. The
architecture in a product line spans across several design
variants, providing a cohesive basis for the product line
designs by ensuring compatibility and interoperability
across the product line.
4.4.2.5 Notion of Interface The notion of interface
is one of the most important items to consider when
defining the architecture of a system. The term “inter­
face” comes from Latin words “inter” and “facere” and
means “to do something between things.” Therefore, the
fundamental aspect of an interface is functional and is
defined as inputs and outputs of functions. As functions
are performed by physical elements, inputs/outputs of
functions are also carried by physical elements, called

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

69

Architecture Definition Process

Table 4.1

Examples of system elements and physical interfaces

Element

Product system

Service system

Enterprise system

System
element

Hardware parts (mechanics,
electronics, electrical,
plastic, chemical, etc.)
Operator roles
Software pieces
Hardware parts, protocols,
procedures, etc.

Processes, databases,
procedures, etc.

Corporate, direction, division,
department, project, technical
team, leader, etc.
IT components

Physical
interface

Operator roles
Software applications
Protocols,
documents, etc.

Protocols, procedures,
documents, etc.

(a)
X

C1
Function
“send”

I/O flow

Function
“receive”

System element 1

Physical interface

System element 2

C2

X

physical interfaces. Consequentially, both functional and
physical aspects are considered in the notion of interface.
Examples of system elements and physical interfaces are
shown in Table 4.1.
A representation of an interface in Figure 4.7 shows
the function “send,” located in one system element; the
function “receive,” located in the other one; and the
physical interface that supports the input/output flow. In
the context of complex exchanges between system ele­
ments in information technology (IT) systems, a pro­
tocol is seen as a physical interface that carries exchanges
of data.
4.4.2.6 Coupling Matrix Coupling matrices (also
called N2 diagrams) are a basic method to define the
aggregates and the order of integration (Grady, 1994).
They are used during architecture definition, with the
goal of keeping the interfaces as simple as possible (see
Fig. 4.8). Simplicity of interfaces can be a distinguishing
characteristic and a selection criterion between alternate
architectural candidates. The coupling matrices are also
useful for optimizing the aggregate definition and the
verification of interfaces (see Section 4.8.2.3).
4.4.2.7 Allocation and Partitioning of Logical
Entities to Physical Entities Defining a physical
structural model of the architecture of a system con­

X

X

C3

X

X
C4

X
Figure 4.7 Interface representation. Reprinted with per­
mission from Alain Faisandier. All other rights reserved.

X

X

X

X

C5

X
X

X

X

X
C7

X
X

X
A1

X

X

C3

X

X

X

C6

X

A3

X
X

X

C2

X

X

X

C4

X

X

X
C8

X
X

X
C5

X

X

C7

X

X

C9

X
B1

C9

X

A2

(b)
C1

X
C8

X

X

X

C6

B2

X

B3

Figure 4.8 (a) Initial arrangement of aggregates; (b) final
arrangement after reorganization. Reprinted with permission
from Alain Faisandier. All other rights reserved.

sists of identifying system elements capable of
performing the functions of logical models, identi­
fying the physical interfaces capable to carry input/
output flows and control flows, and taking into

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

70

Technical Processes

account architectural characteristics that characterize
the system in which they are included.
The term allocation does not mean just to allocate
logical entities to existing system elements. Partitioning
and allocation means to separate, gather, or decompose
logical entities into partitions and then to make the
correspondence between these partitions and potential
system elements. The system elements either exist (reus­
able, repurposed, or purchasable) can be developed and
technically implemented.
Nonfunctional requirements and/or architectural char­
acteristics are used as criteria to analyze, assess, and
select candidate system elements and logical partitions.
Examples of assessment criteria include similar trans­
formations within the same technology, similar level of
efficiency, exchange of same type of input/output flows
(information, energy, materials), centralized or distrib­
uted controls, execution with close frequency level,
dependability conditions, environment resistance level,
and other enterprise constraints.
4.4.2.8 Defining Candidate Architectures and Selecting
the Preferred One The goal of the architecture defini­
tion process is to provide the “best” possible architecture
made of suitable system elements and interfaces, that is,
the architecture that answers, at best, all the stakeholder
and system requirements, depending on agreed limits or
margins of each requirement. The preferred way to do this
is by producing several candidate architectures; analyzing,
assessing, and comparing them; and then selecting the
most suitable one.
Candidate architectures are defined according to cri­
teria or drivers in order to build up a set of system ele­
ments (e.g., separate, gather, connect, and disconnect
the network of system elements and their physical
interfaces). Criteria or drivers may include reduction of
the number of interfaces, system elements that can be
tested separately, modularity (i.e., low interdependence),
replaceability of system elements during maintenance,
compatible technology, proximity of elements in space,
handling (e.g., weight, volume, transportation facilities),
and optimization of resources and information shared
between elements.
Viable candidate architectures have to satisfy all
required features (e.g., functions, characteristics) after
trade-offs are made. The preferred architecture repre­
sents an optimum such that the architecture and design

match the complete set of stakeholder and system
requirements. This proposition depends on stakeholder
and system requirements being feasible and validated,
and that feasibility and validation are demonstrated or
proven. Assessments, studies, mock-ups, etc. are gener­
ally performed in parallel with architecture and design
activities to obtain “proven” requirements.
Architecture definition activities include optimiza­
tion to obtain a balance among architectural character­
istics and acceptable risks. Certain analyses such as
performance, efficiency, maintainability, and cost are
required to get sufficient data that characterize the
global or detailed behavior of the candidate architec­
tures with respect to the stakeholder and system require­
ments. Those analyses are conducted with the system
analysis process (see Section 4.6) and as specialty engi­
neering activities (see Chapter 10).
4.4.2.9 Methods
and
Modeling
Techniques
Modeling, simulation, and prototyping used during
architecture definition can significantly reduce the risk
of failure in the finished system. Systems engineers use
modeling techniques and simulation on large complex
systems to manage the risk of failure to meet system
mission and perfor­mance requirements. These are best
performed by subject matter experts who develop and
validate the models, conduct the simulations, and ana­
lyze the results. Refer to Chapter 9 for a more detailed
treatment of models and simulations.
4.5

Design Definition Process

4.5.1 Overview
4.5.1.1

Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,

[6.4.5.1] The purpose of the Design Definition process
is to provide sufficient detailed data and information
about the system and its elements to enable the imple­
mentation consistent with architectural entities as
defined in models and views of the system architecture.

4.5.1.2 Description System architecture deals with
high‐level principles, concepts, and characteristics rep­
resented by general views or models excluding details
(see Section 4.4). System design supplements the system
architecture providing information and data useful and

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Design Definition Process

necessary for implementation of the system elements.
This information and data details the expected prop­
erties allocated to each system element and/or to enable
the transition toward their implementation.
Design is the process of developing, expressing,
documenting, and communicating the realization of the
architecture of the system through a complete set of
design characteristics described in a form suitable for
implementation. Figure 4.9 is the IPO diagram for the
design definition process.
Design concerns every system element (e.g., com­
posed of implementation technologies such as
mechan­ics, electronics, software, chemistry, human
operations, and services) for which specific engi­
neering processes are needed. The design definition
process provides the detailed information and data
that enable the implementation of a particular system

71

element. This process provides feedback to the parent
system architecture to consolidate or confirm the
allocation and partitioning of architectural entities to
system elements.
As a result, the design definition process provides
the description of the design characteristics and design
enablers necessary for implementation. Design charac­
teristics include dimensions, shapes, materials, and data
processing structures. Design enablers include formal
expressions or equations, drawings, diagrams, tables of
metrics with their values and margins, patterns, algo­
rithms, and heuristics.
4.5.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
design definition process are listed in Figure 4.9.
Descriptions of each input and output are provided in
Appendix E.

Controls

Inputs
• Life cycle concepts
• System function definition
• System requirements
• System functional interface
identification
• System architecture
description
• System architecture
rationale
• Preliminary interface
definition
• Preliminary TPM needs
• Preliminary TPM data
• Architecture traceability
• Interface definition update
identification
• Implementation traceability
• Life cycle constraints

Activities
• Prepare for design
definition
• Establish design
characteristics and design
enablers related to each
system element
• Assess alternatives for
obtaining system elements
• Manage the design

Outputs
• Design definition strategy
• System design description
• System design rationale
• Interface definition
• TPM needs
• TPM data
• Design traceability
• System element descriptions
• Design definition record

Enablers
Figure 4.9 IPO diagram for the design definition process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and Walden. Usage
per the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

72

Technical Processes

4.5.1.4 Process Activities The design definition pro­
cess includes the following activities:
•• Prepare for design definition.
–– Plan for technology management. Identify the
technologies needed to achieve the design objec­
tives for the system and its system elements. The
technology management includes obsolescence
management. Determine which technologies and
system elements have a risk of becoming obso­
lete. Plan for their potential replacement, including
identification of potential evolving technologies.
–– Identify the applicable types of design charac­
teristics for each system element considering the
technologies that will be applied. Periodically
assess the design characteristics and adjust as
the system architecture evolves.
–– Define and document the design definition
strategy, including the need for and requirements
of any enabling systems, products, or services.
•• Establish design characteristics and design enablers
related to each system element.
–– Perform requirements allocation to system ele­
ments for all requirements and system elements
not fully addressed in the architecture definition
process.
Note: Usually, every system requirement is transformed into architectural entities and architectural
characteristics. Those entities or characteristics are
then allocated to system elements, either by direct
assignment or by some kind of partitioning. However,
there will be some cases where it is impractical or
impossible to transform a requirement into an architectural entity. In either case, it is important to do
some degree of analysis or study to determine how
best to flow down each requirement. It is good practice to try to do as much of the allocation as possible
in the architecture definition process.

–– Define the design characteristics relating to the
architectural characteristics for the architectural
entities, and ensure that the design characteristics
are feasible. Use design enablers such as models
(physical and analytical), design heuristics, etc.
If the design characteristics are determined infea­
sible, then assess other design alternatives or per­
form trades of other system definition elements.

–– Perform interface definition to define the inter­
faces that were not defined by the architecture
definition process or that need to be refined as
the design details evolve. This includes both
internal interfaces between the system elements
and the external interfaces with other systems.
–– Capture the design characteristics of each system
element. The resulting artifacts will be dependent
on the design methods and techniques used.
–– Provide rationale about selection of major imple­
mentation options and enablers.
•• Assess alternatives for obtaining system elements.
–– Identify existing implemented elements. These
include COTS, reused, or other nondeveloped
system elements. Alternatives for new system
elements to be developed may be studied.
–– Assess options for the system element, including
the COTS system elements, the reused system
elements, and the new system elements to be
developed using selection criteria that is derived
from the design characteristics.
–– Select the most appropriate alternatives.
–– If the decision is made to develop the system
element, rest of the design definition process
and the implementation process are used. If the
decision is to buy or reuse a system element,
the acquisition process may be used to obtain the
system element.
•• Manage the design.
–– Capture and maintain the rationale for all
selections among alternatives and decisions for
the design, architecture characteristics, design
enablers, and sources of system elements.
–– Manage the maintenance and evolution of the
design, including the alignment with the archi­
tecture. Assess and control evolution of the design
characteristics.
–– Establish and maintain bidirectional traceabi­
lity between the architecture entities (including
views, models, and viewpoints) to the stakeholder
requirements and concerns; system requirements
and constraints; system analysis, trades, and ratio­
nale; verification criteria and results; and design
elements. The traceability between the design
characteristics and the architectural entities also
helps ensure architectural compliance.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Design Definition Process

–– Provide baseline information for configuration
management.
–– Maintain the design baseline and the design
definition strategy.
Common approaches and tips:
•• Discipline engineers, or designers, perform the
design definition of each concerned system element;
they provide strong support (knowledge and com­
petencies) to systems engineers, or architects, in
the evaluation and selection of candidate system
architectures and system elements. Inversely, sys­
tems engineers, or architects, must provide feedback
to discipline engineers or designers to improve
knowledge and know‐how.
4.5.2

Elaboration

4.5.2.1 Architecture Definition versus Design
Definition The architecture definition process focuses
on the understanding and resolution of the stakeholder
concerns. It develops insights into the relation between
these concerns, the solution requirements, and the emer­
gent properties and behaviors of the system. Architecture
focuses on suitability, viability, and adaptability over the
life cycle. An effective architecture is as design‐agnostic
as possible to allow for maximum flexibility in the
design trade space. It focuses more on the “what” than
the “how.”
The design definition process, on the other hand, is
driven by specified requirements, the architecture, and
more detailed analysis of performance and feasibility.
Design definition addresses the implementation tech­
nologies and their assimilation. Design provides the
“how” or “implement‐to” level of the definition.
4.5.2.2 Notions and Principles Used within Design
The purpose of system design is to make the link bet­
ween the architecture of the SOI and the implementation
of technological system elements that compose it. So,
system design is understood as the complete set of
detailed models, properties, or characteristics of each
system element, described into a form suitable for
implementation.
Every technological domain or discipline owns its
peculiar laws, rules, theories, and enablers concerning
transformational, structural, behavioral, and temporal

73

properties of its composing parts of materials, energy, or
information. These specific parts and/or their composi­
tions are described with typical design characteristics
and enablers. These allow achieving the implementation
of the system element of interest through various trans­
formations, linkages, and exchanges required by design
characteristics (e.g., operability level, reliability rate,
speed, safeguard level) that have been assigned during
the architecture definition process.
•• Examples of generic design characteristics in
mechanics of solids: Shape, geometrical pattern,
dimension, volume, surface, curves, resistance to
forces, distribution of forces, weight, velocity of
motion, temporal persistence
•• Examples of generic design characteristics in software: Distribution of processing, data structures, data
persistence, procedural abstraction, data abstraction,
control abstraction, encapsulation, creational pat­
terns (e.g., builder, factory, prototype, singleton), and
structural patterns (e.g., adapter, bridge, composite,
decorator, proxy)
4.5.2.3 Design Descriptors Because it is sometimes
difficult to define applicable requirements to a system
element from the engineering data of the parent system
(in particular from the expected architectural characteris­
tics), it is possible to use the design descriptor technique
as a complement. A design descriptor is the set of generic
design characteristics and of their possible values. If sim­
ilar, but not exact, system elements exist, it is possible to
analyze these in order to identify their basic characteris­
tics. Variations of the possible values of each characteristic
determine potential candidate system elements.
4.5.2.4 Holistic Design It is important to understand
that design definition starts with the system as a whole
consisting of system elements and ends with a definition
(i.e., design) for each of these system elements (not just
one of them) and how they are designed to work
together as a complete system. System elements are
identified in the architecture, although the architecture
might only identify those elements that are architec­
turally significant.
During the design definition process, it might be
necessary to identify additional system elements to make
the whole system work. This might entail embedding
some enabling elements or services inside the system

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

74

Technical Processes

boundary. There is usually a trade‐off between having
an enabling item inside or outside the system. The
architecture definition process could make this decision,
but it might be better to allow design definition to handle
this since it is often dependent on other design trade‐offs
and on design decisions that are made along the way.
Some of these additional system elements might be
necessary to account for “missing” functions that were
not identified in the architecture. For example, it might
be determined that the various system elements should
not all produce their own power backup but instead there
should be a separate system element that performs this
function for all the other elements. This would be the
result of a design analysis to determine the best place to
put this function. Or it could be the result of applying a
design pattern to this particular problem.
It might be necessary to provide feedback to the
architecture definition process regarding these design
decisions and trade‐offs to ensure there are no negative
impacts on the architecture as a whole. The architecture
might or might not be updated to reflect these design
details, since this depends on whether it is important to
capture these features as architecturally significant or not.
It is this holistic approach to design of a system that
distinguishes this from design of an individual product
or service. Holistic design is an approach to design that
considers the system being designed as an interconnected
whole, which is also part of something larger. Holistic
concepts can be applied to the system as a whole along
with the system in its context (e.g., the enterprise or
mission in which the system participates), as well as the
design of mechanical devices, the layout of spaces, and
so forth. This approach to design often incorporates
concerns about the environment, with holistic designers
considering how their design will impact the environ­
ment and attempting to reduce environmental impact in
their designs. Holistic design is about more than merely
trying to meet the system requirements.
4.6

System Analysis Process

4.6.1
4.6.1.1

Overview
Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,

[6.4.6.1] The purpose of the System Analysis process is
to provide a rigorous basis of data and information for
technical understanding to aid decision‐making across
the life cycle.

4.6.1.2 Description This process performs quanti­
tative assessments and estimations that are based on
analyses such as cost analysis, affordability analysis,
technical risk analysis, feasibility analysis, effectiveness
analysis, and other critical quality characteristics. Those
analyses use mainly quantitative modeling techniques,
analytical models, and associated simulations, which
are applied at varying levels of rigor and complexity
depending on the level of fidelity needed. In some cases,
it may be necessary to employ a variety of analytic
functions or experimentation to obtain the necessary
insight. The results serve as inputs into various technical
decisions, providing confidence in the adequacy and
integrity of the system definition toward achieving the
appropriate system balance.
This process is used by (examples, but not limited to):
•• Mission and business analysis process to analyze
and estimate candidate OpsCon and/or candidate
business models related to a potential SOI in terms
of feasibility, costs, risks, and effectiveness
•• Stakeholder requirements definition process and
system requirements definition process to analyze
issues relating to conflicts among the set of require­
ments, in particular those related to feasibility, costs,
technical risks, and effectiveness (mainly perfor­
mances, operational conditions, and constraints)
•• Architectural definition process and design defini­
tion process to analyze and estimate architectural
and design characteristics of candidate architectures
and/or system elements, providing arguments in
order to be able to select the most efficient ones
in terms of costs, technical risks, effectiveness (e.g.,
performances, dependability, human factors), and
other stakeholder concerns such as critical quality
characteristics, affordability, maintenance, etc.
•• Integration process, verification process, and vali­
dation process to estimate the related strategies
•• Project assessment and control process to obtain
estimates of the performance against established
targets and thresholds, especially with respect to
the technical measures (MOEs, MOSs, MOPs, and
TPMs).
The results of analyses and estimations, as data,
information, and arguments, are provided to the
decision management process for selecting the most
efficient alternative or candidate. In some cases, the

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

System Analysis Process

75

Controls

Inputs
• Life cycle concepts
• Analysis situations
• Life cycle constraints

Activities

Outputs

• Prepare for system
analysis
• Perform system analysis
• Manage system analysis

• System analysis strategy
• System analysis report
• System analysis record

Enablers
Figure 4.10 IPO diagram for the system analysis process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and Walden. Usage
per the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

results may be provided to the project assessment and
control process, if the information is needed to monitor
the progress of the system against its system objectives,
performance thresholds, or growth targets, such as the
projected or modeled reliability early in the develop­
ment of the system as compared to its reliability
growth curve.
Figure 4.10 is the IPO diagram for the system analysis
process.
4.6.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
system analysis process are listed in Figure 4.10.
Descriptions of each input and output are provided in
Appendix E.
4.6.1.4 Process Activities The system analysis pro­
cess includes the following activities:
•• Prepare for system analysis.
–– Define the scope, types, objectives, and level of
accuracy of required analyses and their level of
importance to the system stakeholders.
–– Define or select evaluation criteria (e.g., oper­
ational conditions, environmental conditions,
performance, dependability, costs types, risks
types). The criteria mainly come from stake­
holder needs, nonfunctional requirements, and
design characteristics. The criteria must be

consistent with the decision management strategy
(see Section 5.3).
–– Determine the candidate elements to be analyzed,
the methods and procedures to be used, and the
needed justification items.
–– Determine the need and requirements for and
obtain or acquire access to the enabling sys­
tems, products, or services necessary to perform
analyses of the SOI.
–– Schedule the analyses according to the avail­
ability of models, engineering data (e.g., OpsCon,
business models, stakeholder requirements,
system requirements, design characteristics,
verification actions, validation actions), skilled
personnel, and procedures.
–– Document the corresponding system analysis
strategy.
•• Perform system analysis.
–– Collect the data and inputs needed for the anal­
ysis, highlighting any assumptions. Inputs can
include models. Those models may be:
°° Physical models, specific to each discipline,
allowing to simulate physical phenomena
°° Representation models mainly used to simu­
late the behavior of a system or system element
Analytical
models (deterministic and stochas­tic)
°°
used to establish values of estimates to approach

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

76

Technical Processes

the real operation of a system or system
element
–– Carry out analyses as scheduled using defined
methods and procedures for cost, risk, effective­
ness, and validation of assumptions.
–– Conduct in‐process peer reviews with appro­
priate subject matter experts to assess the validity,
quality, and consistency of the evolving system
with the stakeholder objectives and with previous
analyses. Record and report in‐process results.
•• Manage system analysis.
–– Baseline the analysis results or reports using the
configuration management process.
–– Maintain an engineering history of the system
evolution from stakeholder needs definition to
ultimate system retirement so that the project
team can conduct bidirectional searches at any
time during—or after—the system life cycle.
Common approaches and tips:
•• The methods are chosen based on time, cost, accu­
racy, technical drivers, and criticality of analysis.
Due to cost and schedule, most systems only per­
form system analysis for critical characteristics.
•• Models can never simulate all the behavior of a
system: they operate only in one limited field with
a restricted number of variables. When a model is
used, it is always necessary to make sure that the
parameters and data inputs are part of the operation
field; if not, irregular outputs are likely.
•• Models evolve during the project: by modification
of parameters, by entering new data, and by the use
of new tools.
•• It is recommended to concurrently use several types
of models in order to compare the results and/or to
take into account another characteristic or property
of the system.
•• Results of a simulation shall always be given in
their modeling context: tool used, selected assump­
tions, parameters and data introduced, and variance
of the outputs.
4.6.2 Elaboration
During a system’s life cycle, assessments should be
performed when technical choices have to be made
or justified, and not just to compare different solutions.

System analysis provides a rigorous approach to
technical decision making. It is used to perform evalua­
tions, including a set of analysis such as cost analysis,
technical risk analysis, effectiveness analysis, and
analysis of other properties.
4.6.2.1 Cost Analysis A cost analysis considers the
full life cycle costs (LCC). The cost baseline can be
adapted according to the project and the system. The full
LCC may include labor and nonlabor cost items; it may
include development, manufacturing, service realization,
sales, customer utilization, supply chain, maintenance,
and disposal costs (also see Section 10.1).
4.6.2.2 Technical Risk Analysis Technical risks should
not be confused with project risks even if the method
to manage them is the same. Technical risks address the
system itself, not the project for its development. Of
course, technical risks may interact with project risks. The
system analysis process is often needed to perform
the technical assessments that provide quantification and
understanding of the probability or impact of a potential
risk or opportunity (see Section 5.4 for risk management
process details).
4.6.2.3 Effectiveness Analysis System effectiveness
analysis is a term for a broad category of analyses that
evaluate the degree or extent to which a system meets one
or more criteria—the effectiveness of the system in meet­
ing the criteria in its intended operational environment.
The objective(s) and criteria may be derived from one
or more desired system characteristics, such as MOEs,
TPMs, or other attributes of the system, and influence the
details of the analysis conducted. The analysis is more
than simply determining if the criteria are met but also
the degree to which they are met (or fall short or exceed),
as this information is used to support trade‐offs and
evaluation of alternatives (such as which candidates to
develop further, where improvements are needed or cost
savings are possible). One of the challenges of effective­
ness analysis is to prioritize and select the right set of
effectiveness objectives and criteria; for example, if the
product is made for a single use, the maintainability and
the capability of evolution will not be relevant criteria.
4.6.2.4 Methods and Modeling Techniques Various
types of models and modeling techniques can be used in
the context of system analysis. These include, but are not

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Implementation Process

limited to, physical models, structural models, behavior
models, functional models, temporal models, mass
models, cost models, probabilistic models, parametric
models, layout models, network models, visualizations,
simulations, mathematical models, and prototypes. For
more information on models and modeling methods, see
Section 9.1.
4.7

Implementation Process

4.7.1 Overview
4.7.1.1

Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,

[6.4.7.1] The purpose of the Implementation process is
to realize a specified system element.

The implementation process creates or fabricates a
system element conforming to that element’s detailed
description (requirements, architecture, design, including
interfaces). The element is constructed employing appro­
priate technology and industry practices.

77

4.7.1.2 Description During the implementation
process, engineers follow the requirements allocated
to the system element to fabricate, code, or build each
individual element using specified materials, pro­cesses,
physical or logical arrangements, standards, technol­
ogies, and/or information flows outlined in detailed
drawings or other design documentation. System
require­ments are verified and stakeholder requirements
are validated. If subsequent configuration audits reveal
discrepancies, recursive interactions occur with prede­
cessor activities or processes, as required, to correct
them. Figure 4.11 is the IPO diagram for the implemen­
tation process.
4.7.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
implementation process are listed in Figure 4.11.
Descriptions of each input and output are provided in
Appendix E.
4.7.1.4 Process Activities Implementation process
activities begin with detailed design and include the
following:

Controls

Inputs
• Life cycle concepts
• System architecture
description
• System architecture
rationale
• System design description
• System design rationale
• Interface definition
• Design traceability
• System element descriptions

Activities
• Prepare for
implementation
• Perform implementation
• Manage results of
implementation

Outputs
• Implementation strategy
• Implementation enabling
system requirements
• Implementation constraints
• System elements
• System element
documentation
• Operator/maintainer
training materials
• Implementation traceability
• Implementation report
• Implementation record

Enablers
Figure 4.11 IPO diagram for the implementation process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and Walden. Usage
per the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

78

Technical Processes

•• Prepare for implementation.
–– Define fabrication/coding procedures, tools and
equipment to be used, implementation toler­
ances, and the means and criteria for auditing
configuration of resulting elements to the detailed
design documentation. In the case of repeated
system element implementations (such as for
mass manufacturing or replacement elements),
the implementation strategy is defined/refined
to achieve consistent and repeatable element
production and retained in the project decision
database for future use.
–– Elicit from stakeholders, developers, and team­
mates any constraints imposed by implemen­
tation technology, strategy, or implementation
enabling systems. Record the constraints for
consideration in the definition of the require­
ments, architecture, and design.
–– Document the plan for acquiring or gaining
access to resources needed during implementa­
tion. The planning includes the identification of
requirements and interfaces for the enabling
system.
•• Perform implementation.
–– Develop data for training users on correct and
safe procedures for operating and maintaining
that element, either as a stand‐alone end item or
as part of a larger system.
–– Complete detailed product, process, material spec­
ifications (“build‐to” or “code‐to” documents),
and corresponding analyses.
–– Ensure the realization of the system elements
per the detailed product, process, and material
specifications and produce documented evidence
of implementation compliance—specifically,
these tasks are as follows:
°° Conduct peer reviews and testing—Inspect and
verify software for correct functionality, white
box testing, etc. in accordance with software/
hardware best practices.
°° Conduct hardware conformation audits—
Compare hardware elements to detailed draw­
ings to ensure that each element meets its
detailed specifications prior to integration
with other elements.

–– Prepare initial training capability and draft
training documentation—To be used to provide
the user community with the ability to operate,
conduct failure detection and isolation, conduct
contingency scenarios, and maintain the system
as appropriate.
–– Prepare a hazardous materials log, if applicable.
–– Determine the packaging and storage require­
ments for the system element and ensure ini­
tiation of the packaging and/or storage, at the
appropriate time.
•• Manage results of implementation.
–– Identify and record implementation results.
Maintain the records per organizational policy.
–– Record any anomalies encountered during the
implementation process, and analyze and resolve
the anomalies (corrective actions or improve­
ments) using the quality assurance process (see
Section 5.8).
–– Establish and maintain traceability of the
implemented system elements with the system
archi­tecture, design, and system and inter­face
that
are
needed
for
requirements
imple­mentation.
–– Provide baseline information for configuration
management.
Common approaches and tips:
•• Keep the Integrated Product Development Team
(IPDT) engaged to assist with configuration issues
and redesign.
•• Inspections are a proactive way to build in quality
(Gilb and Graham, 1993).
•• In anticipation of improving process control,
reducing production inspections, and lowering
maintenance activities, many manufacturing firms
use Design for Six Sigma or lean manufacturing.
•• Conduct hardware conformation audits or sys­
tem element level hardware verification; ensure
sufficient software unit verification prior to
integration.
•• Validate simulations; interface simulator drivers
should be representative of tactical environments.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Integration Process

4.7.2

Elaboration

4.7.2.1 Implementation Concepts The implementa­
tion process typically focuses on the following four
forms of system elements:
•• Hardware/physical—Output is fabricated or adapted
hardware or physical element. If the hardware
element is being reused, it may require modification.
•• Software—Output is software code and executable
images
•• Operational resources—Output includes proce­
dures and training. These are verified to the system
requirements and OpsCon.
•• Services—Output includes specified services.
These may be the result of one or more hardware,
software, or operational elements resulting in the
service.
The implementation process can support either the
creation (fabrication or development) or adaptation of
system elements. For system elements that are reused or
acquired, such as COTS, the implementation process
allows for adaption of the elements to satisfy the needs
of the SOI. This is usually accomplished via configura­
tion settings provided with the element (e.g., hardware
configuration switches and software configuration tables).
Newly created products have more flexibility to be
designed and developed to meet the needs of the SOI
without modification.

4.8

Integration Process

4.8.1
4.8.1.1

Overview
Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,

[6.4.8.1] The purpose of the Integration process is to syn­
thesize a set of system elements into a realized system
(product or service) that satisfies system requirements,
architecture, and design.

4.8.1.2 Description Integration consists of progres­
sively assembling the implemented system elements
(hardware, software, and operational resources) that
compose the SOI as defined and verifying the correctness

79

of the static and dynamic aspects of interfaces between
the implemented system elements. There is a strong
focus on the interfaces to ensure that the intended oper­
ation of the system elements and interoperation with
other systems is achieved. Any integration constraints
are identified and considered during the definition of the
requirements, architecture, and design. The interaction
of the integration process with the system definition
processes (i.e., system requirements definition, archi­
tecture definition, and design definition) early in the
development is essential for avoiding integration issues
during the system realization.
The integration process works closely with the verifi­
cation and validation (V&V) processes. This process is
iterated with the V&V processes, as appropriate. As the
integration of system elements occurs, the verification
process is invoked to check the correct implementation
of architectural characteristics and design properties.
The validation process may be invoked to check that
the individual system elements provide the function
intended. The process checks that all boundaries bet­
ween system elements have been correctly identified
and described, including physical, logical, and human–
system interfaces and interactions (physical, sensory,
and cognitive), and that all system element functional,
performance, and design requirements and constraints
are satisfied.
Figure 4.12 is the IPO diagram for the integration
process.
4.8.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
integration process are listed in Figure 4.12. Descriptions
of each input and output are provided in Appendix E.
4.8.1.4 Process Activities The integration process
includes the following activities:
•• Prepare for integration.
–– Define critical checkpoints to provide assurance
of the correct behavior and operation of inter­
faces and functions of the system elements.
–– Establish the integration strategy that minimizes
integration time, costs, and risks:
°° Define an optimized sequence order of assem­
bly aggregates, composed of system elements,
based on the system architecture definition,

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

80

Technical Processes

Controls

Inputs
• Life cycle concepts
• Interface definitions
• System element
descriptions
• System elements
• System element
documentation
• Implementation traceability
• Accepted system or system
element

Activities

Outputs

• Prepare for integration
• Perform integration - Successively
integrate system element
configurations until the complete
system is synthesized.
• Manage results of
integration

• Integration strategy
• Integration enabling system
requirements
• Integration constraints
• Integration procedure
• Integrated system or system
elements
• Interface definition update
identification
• Integration report
• Integration record

Enablers
Figure 4.12 IPO diagram for the integration process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and Walden. Usage per
the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

and on appropriate integration approaches and
techniques.
Define
the configurations of the aggregates
°°
to be built and verified (depending on sets of
parameters).
°° Define the assembly procedures and related
enablers.
–– Identify integration constraints on the SOI, aris­
ing from the integration strategy, to be incorpo­
rated in the system requirements, architecture,
and design (this includes requirements such as
accessibility, safety for integrators, and required
interconnections for sets of implemented system
elements and for enablers).
–– The acquisition of the enablers can be done through
various ways such as rental, procurement,
development, reuse, and subcontracting. An enabler
may be a complete enabling system developed as a
separate project from the project of the SOI.
•• Perform integration - Successively integrate system
element configurations until the complete system is
synthesized.

–– Assemble the verified and validated system ele­
ments to form the incremental aggregate using
the defined assembly procedures, the related
integration enabling systems, and the interface
control definitions.
–– Invoke the system V&V processes, as needed, to
check the correct implementation of architectural
characteristics and design properties and to check
that the individual system elements provide the
functions intended.
•• Manage results of integration.
–– Identify and record the results of integration.
Maintain bidirectional traceability of the updated
integrated system elements with the updated
system architecture, design, and system and
interface requirements. Maintain the records,
including configuration updates, per organiza­
tional policy.
–– Record anomalies observed during the integra­
tion process (identifying corrective actions or
improvements), and resolve them using the
quality assurance process (see Section 5.8).

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Integration Process

–– Update the integration strategy and schedule
according to the progress of the project; in
particular, the order of system elements assem­
bly can be redefined or rescheduled because of
unexpected events or unavailability of system
elements as planned.
–– Coordinate integration activities with the pro­
ject manager (e.g., for scheduling, acquisition
of enablers, hiring of qualified personnel and
resources), the architects or designers (e.g., for
understanding of the architecture, errors, defects,
nonconformance reports), and the configura­
tion manager (e.g., for versions of submitted
elements, architecture and design baselines,
enablers, assembly procedures).
Common approaches and tips:
•• Define an integration strategy that accounts for
the schedule of availability of system elements
(including the personnel that will use, operate,
maintain, and sustain the system) and is consis­
tent with defect/fault isolation and diagnosis
practices.
•• Development of integration enablers such as tools
and facilities can take as long as the system itself.
Development should be started as early as possible
and as soon as the preliminary architecture defini­
tion is frozen.
•• The integration process of complex systems
cannot be easily foreseen, and its progress may be
difficult to control and observe. Therefore, it is
recommended to plan integration with specific
margins using flexible approaches and tech­
niques, integrating sets by similar technologies,
for example.
•• Integrate aggregates in order to detect faults more
easily. The use of the coupling matrix technique
applies for all strategies and especially for the bot­
tom‐up integration strategy (see Section 4.8.2.3).
4.8.2

Elaboration

4.8.2.1 Concept of “Aggregate” The physical
integration of a system is based on the notion of
“aggregate.” An aggregate is made up of several imple­
mented system elements and their physical interfaces
(system elements and connectors). Each aggregate is

81

characterized by a configuration that specifies the
implemented system elements to be physically assem­
bled and their configuration status. A set of verification
actions is applied on each aggregate. To perform these
verification actions, a verification configuration that
includes the aggregate plus verification tools is consti­
tuted. The verification tools are enabling elements and
can be simulators (simulated system elements), stubs
or caps, activators (launchers, drivers), harnesses,
measuring devices, etc.
4.8.2.2 Integration by Level of System According to
the Vee model, the system definition (top‐down branch)
is done by successive levels of decomposition; each level
corresponds to physical architecture of systems and
system elements. The integration (bottom‐up branch)
consists in following the opposite way of composition
level by level.
On a given level, integration of implemented system
elements is done on the basis of the physical architecture,
using integration techniques or approaches as presented
in the next section.
4.8.2.3 Integration Strategy and Approaches The
integration of implemented system elements is per­
formed according to a predefined strategy. The
strategy relies on the way the architecture of the
system has been defined. The strategy is described in
an integration plan that defines the configuration of
expected aggregates of implemented system elements,
the order of assembly of these aggregates to carry out
efficient verification actions and validation actions
(e.g., inspections or tests). The integration strategy is
thus elaborated in coordination with the selected
verification strategy and validation strategy (see
­
Sections 4.9 and 4.11).
To define an integration strategy, one can use one or
several possible integration approaches and techniques.
Any of these may be used individually or in combination.
The selection of integration techniques depends on
several factors, in particular the type of system element,
delivery time, order of delivery of system elements,
risks, constraints, etc. Each integration technique has
strengths and weaknesses, which should be considered
in the context of the SOI. Some integration techniques
are summarized hereafter:
•• Global integration—Also known as “big‐bang
integration”; all the delivered implemented system

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

82

Technical Processes

elements are assembled in only one step. This tech­
nique is simple and does not require simulating the
system elements not being available at that time.
But it is difficult to detect and localize faults; inter­
face faults are detected late. It should be reserved
for simple systems, with few interactions and few
system elements without technological risks.
•• Integration “with the stream”—The delivered system
elements are assembled as they become available.
This technique allows starting the integration quickly.
It is complex to implement because of the necessity
to simulate the system elements not yet available. It
is impossible to control the end‐to‐end “functional
chains”; so global tests are postponed very late in the
schedule. It should be reserved for well‐known and
controlled systems without technological risks.
•• Incremental integration—In a predefined order,
one or a very few system elements are added to an
already integrated increment of system elements.
This technique allows a fast localization of faults:
a new fault is usually localized in lately integrated
system elements or dependent on a faulty interface.
It requires simulators for absent system elements
and many test cases: each system element addition
requires the verification of the new configuration
and regression testing. This technique is applicable
to any type of architecture.
•• Subset integration—System elements are assembled
by subsets (a subset is an aggregate), and then subsets
are assembled together; could be called “functional
chains integration.” This technique saves time due
to parallel integration of subsets; delivery of partial
products is possible. It requires less means (enablers)
and fewer test cases than integration by increments.
The subsets may be defined during the architecture
definition; they may correspond to subsystems/
systems as defined in the architecture.
•• Top‐down integration—System elements or aggre­
gates are integrated in their activation or utilization
order. Availability of a skeleton of the system and
early detection of architectural faults are possible;
definition of test cases is close to reality; the reuse
of test data sets is possible. But many stubs/caps
need to be created; it is difficult to define test cases
of the leaf system elements (lowest level). This tech­
nique is mainly used in intensive software systems.
It starts from the system element of higher level;

system elements of lower level are added until all
leaf system elements are incorporated.
•• Bottom‐up integration—System elements or aggre­
gates are integrated in the opposite order of their
activation or utilization. The definition of test cases
is easy; early detection of faults (usually localized in
the leaf system element) is possible; the number of
simulators to be used is reduced; an aggregate can be
a subsystem. But the test cases shall be redefined for
each step; drivers are difficult to define and realize;
system elements of lower levels are “overtested”;
this technique does not allow quick detection of the
architectural faults. It is used for intensive software
systems and for any kind of hardware system.
•• Criterion‐driven integration—The most critical
system elements compared to the selected criterion
are first integrated (e.g., dependability, complexity,
technological innovation). The criteria are gener­
ally related to risks. This technique allows test­ing
early and intensively critical system elements;
early verification of architecture and design choices
is possible. But the test cases and test data sets are
difficult to define.
•• Reorganization of coupling matrices—As noted in
Section 4.4.2.6, coupling matrices are useful for
highlighting interfaces during architecture defini­
tion as well as during integration. The integration
strategy is defined and optimized by reorganizing
the coupling matrix in order to group the system
elements into aggregates and minimize the number
of interfaces to be verified between aggregates.
When verifying the interactions between aggre­
gates, the matrix is an aid for fault detection. If by
adding a system element to an aggregate, an error is
detected, the fault can be either related to the system
element, or to the aggregate, or to the interfaces. If
the fault is related to the aggregate, it can relate to
any system element or any interface between the
system elements internal to the aggregate.
Usually, the integration strategy is defined as a
combination of these approaches and techniques in order
to optimize the integration work. The optimization takes
into account the realization time of the system elements,
their delivery scheduled order, their level of complexity,
the technical risks, the availability of assembly tools,
cost, deadlines, specific personnel capability, etc.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Verification Process

4.9

Verification Process

4.9.1

Overview

4.9.1.1

Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,

[6.4.9.1] The purpose of the Verification process is to pro­
vide objective evidence that a system or system element
fulfils its specified requirements and characteristics.

4.9.1.2 Content/Description As described here, this
process is an instance of a verification process applied to
a SOI, or any system or system element that compose it,
to establish that it has been “built right.”
The verification process can be applied to any engi­
neering element that has contributed to the definition
and realization of the system itself (e.g., verification of
a system requirement, a function, an input/output flow, a
system element, an interface, a design property, a veri­
fication procedure). The purpose of the verification
process is to provide evidence that no error/defect/fault
has been introduced at the time of any transformation
of inputs into outputs; it is used to confirm that this
transformation has been made “right” according to
the requirements and selected methods, techniques,

83

standards, or rules. As is often stated, verification is
intended to ensure that the “product is built right,” while
validation is intended to ensure that the “right product
is built.” Verification is a transverse activity to every
life cycle stage of the system. In particular during the
development of the system, verification applies onto any
activity and product resulting from the activity.
Figure 4.13 is the IPO diagram for the verification
process.
4.9.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
verification process are listed in Figure 4.13. Descriptions
of each input and output are provided in Appendix E.
4.9.1.4 Process Activities The verification process
includes the following activities:
•• Prepare for verification.
–– Develop a strategy that prioritizes the verifica­
tion actions to minimize costs and risks while
maximizing operational coverage of system
behaviors:
° ° Establish a list of the items for verifica­
tion, including requirements, architectural

Controls

Inputs
• Life cycle concepts
• System requirements
• Verification criteria
• Updated RVTM
• Interface definition
• Integrated system or system
elements
• Integration report

Activities
• Prepare for verification
• Perform verification
• Manage results of
verification

Outputs
• Verification strategy
• Verification enabling system
requirements
• Verification constraints
• Verification procedure
• Final RVTM
• Verified system
• Verification report
• Verification record

Enablers
Figure 4.13 IPO diagram for the verification process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and Walden. Usage
per the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

84

Technical Processes

characteristics, or design properties, and
define the corresponding verification actions.
The approach to verification should be iden­
tified and documented at the time that a
requirement is first documented to ensure
that the requirement as written is indeed
verifiable. This may require restating a
requirement or decomposing it into several
verifiable statements. (For example, how
do you satisfy the legitimate requirement
of a system being “user friendly”?)
°° Establish a list of verification constraints
that need to be considered. The constraints
could impact the implementation of the ver­
ification actions and include contractual
constraints, limitations due to regulatory
requirements, cost, schedule, feasibility to
exercise a func­
tion (such as in some ordi­
nance), safety considerations, physical config­
urations, accessibility, etc.
Considering
the constraints, plan for the
°°
methods or techniques that will be applied for
each verification action. The methods or tech­
niques generally include inspection, analysis,
demonstration, or test (see Section 4.9.2.2).
Note that analysis often is considered to include
modeling, simulation, and analogy when iden­
tifying the verification methods or techniques
and success criteria are also defined that indi­
cates successful verification.
°° Establish the scope of the verification.
Verification consumes resources: time, labor,
facilities, and funds. The selection of what must
be verified should be made according to the
type of system, the objectives of the project,
and the acceptable risks regarding the with­
drawal of a verification action.
–– Develop the verification procedures that support
the verification actions.
°° Schedule the execution of verification actions
in the project steps and define the configura­
tion of submitted items to verification actions.
–– Identify verification constraints on the system
or system elements, arising from the verification
strategy, that relate to specific system requirements,
architecture elements, or design elements. Typical
constraints include performance characteristics,

accessibility, and interface characteristics. Provide
the constraint information for consideration in
the system requirements definition, architecture
definition, and design definition processes.
–– Ensure that the necessary enabling systems,
products, or services required for the verification
actions are available, when needed. The planning
includes the identification of requirements and
interfaces for the enablers. The acquisition of
the enablers can be done through various ways
such as rental, procurement, development, reuse,
and subcontracting. An enabler may be a complete
enabling system developed as a separate project
from the project of the SOI.
•• Perform verification.
–– Implement the verification plan developed in the
preceding subsection. That plan includes detailed
descriptions for the selected verification actions:
°° Item to be verified
°° Expected results and success criteria
°° Selected verification method or technique
°° The data needed
°° The corresponding enabling systems, prod­
ucts, or services
–– Using the verification procedures, execute the
verification actions and record the results.
–– Analyze the verification results against any
established expectations and success criteria to
determine whether the element being verified
indicates conformance.
•• Manage results of verification.
–– Identify and record verification results and
enter data in the Requirements Verification
and Traceability Matrix (RVTM). Maintain
the records per organizational policy.
–– Record anomalies observed during the verification
process, and analyze and resolve the anomalies
(corrective actions or improvements) using the
quality assurance process (see Section 5.8).
–– Establish and maintain bidirectional traceability
of the verified system elements with the system
architecture, design, and system and interface
requirements that are needed for verification.
–– Provide baseline information for configuration
management.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Verification Process

–– Update the verification strategy and schedule
according to the progress of the project; in
particular, planned verification actions can be
redefined or rescheduled as necessary.
–– Coordinate verification activities with the project
manager (e.g., for scheduling, acquisition of
enablers, hiring of qualified personnel and
resources), the architects or designers (e.g., for
errors, defects, nonconformance reports), and the
configuration manager (e.g., for versions of sub­
mitted items, requirements, architecture and design
baselines, enablers, verification procedures).
Common approaches and tips:
•• Beware the temptation to reduce the number of ver­
ification actions due to budget or schedule over­
runs. Remember that discrepancies and errors are
more costly to correct later in the system life cycle.
•• In the progress of the project, it is important to know,
at any time, what has not been verified in order to
estimate the risks about possibly dropping out some
verification actions.
•• Each system requirement should be quantitative,
measurable, unambiguous, understandable, and test­
able. It is generally much easier and more cost‐
effective to ensure that requirements meet these
criteria while they are being written. Requirements
adjustments made after implementation and/or inte­
gration are generally much more costly and may
have wide‐reaching redesign implications. There
are several resources that provide guidance on cre­
ating appropriate requirements (see the System
Requirements Definition Process, Section 4.3).
•• Avoid conducting verification only late in the schedule
when there is less time to handle discrepancies.
•• Testing the actual system is expensive and is not the
only verification technique. Other techniques such
as simulation, analysis, review, etc. can be used on
other engineering elements representing the SOI
such as models, mock‐ups, or partial prototypes.
4.9.2

Elaboration

4.9.2.1 Notion of Verification Action A verification
action describes what must be verified (e.g., a require­
ment, a characteristic, or a property as reference), on

85

which item (e.g., requirement, function, interface,
system element, system), the expected result (deduced
from the reference), the verification technique to apply
(e.g., inspection, analysis, demonstration, test), and on
which level of decomposition of the system (e.g., SOI,
intermediate level system element, leaf level system
element).
The definition of a verification action applied to an
engineering item (e.g., stakeholder requirement, system
requirement, function, interface, system element, proce­
dure, and document) includes the identification of the
item on which the verification action will be performed,
the reference used to define the expected result, and the
appropriate verification technique.
The performance of a verification action onto the
submitted item provides an obtained result which is
compared with the expected result. The comparison
enables the correctness of the item to be determined (see
Fig. 4.14).
Examples of verification actions:
•• Verification of a stakeholder requirement or a
system requirement—To check the application of
syntactic and grammatical rules and characteristics
defined in the stakeholder needs and requirements
definition process and the system requirements
definition process such as necessity, implementation‐
free, unambiguous, consistent, complete, singular,
feasible, traceable, and verifiable.
•• Verification of the architecture of a system—To
check the correct application of the appropriate
patterns and heuristics used and the correct usage
of modeling techniques or methods.
•• Verification of the design of a system element—To
check the correct usage of patterns, trade rules, or
state of the art related to the concerned technology
(e.g., software, mechanics, electronics, chemistry).
•• Verification of a system (product, service, or
enterprise) or system element—To check its real­
ized characteristics or properties (e.g., as mea­
sured) against its specified requirements, expected
architectural characteristics, and design properties
(as described in the requirements, architecture, and
design documents).
Considerations in selecting a verification approach
include practical limitations of accuracy, uncertainty,
repeatability that are imposed by the verification

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

86

Technical Processes

Item

Reference

Used by

Submitted to
Verification action

Defines

Produces

Expected result

Obtained result
Comparision

Yes

Correctness?

No

Figure 4.14 Definition and usage of a verification action. Reprinted with permission from Alain Faisandier. All other rights
reserved.

enablers, the associated measurement methods, and the
availability, accessibility, and interconnection with the
enablers.
4.9.2.2 Verification Techniques Basic verification
techniques are as follows (IEEE 1012, 2012; ISO/IEC/
IEEE 29119, 2013; ISO/IEC/IEEE 29148, 2011):
•• Inspection—This technique is based on visual or
dimensional examination of an element; the verifi­
cation relies on the human senses or uses simple
methods of measurement and handling. Inspection
is generally nondestructive and typically includes
the use of sight, hearing, smell, touch, and taste;
simple physical manipulation; mechanical and
electrical gauging; and measurement. No stimuli
(tests) are necessary. The technique is used to check
properties best determined by observation (e.g.,
paint color, weight, documentation, listing of code).
Peer reviews of process artifacts are also considered
a type of inspection.
•• Analysis—This technique is based on analytical
evidence obtained without any intervention on the
submitted element using mathematical or probabi­
listic calculation, logical reasoning (including the
theory of predicates), modeling, and/or simulation

under defined conditions to show theoretical com­
pliance. Mainly used where testing to realistic con­
ditions cannot be achieved or is not cost‐effective.
•• Demonstration—This technique is used to show
correct operation of the submitted element against
operational and observable characteristics without
using physical measurements (no or minimal instru­
mentation or test equipment). It uses generally a set
of actions selected to show that the element response
to stimuli is suitable or to show that operators can
perform their assigned tasks when using the
element. Observations are made and compared with
predetermined/expected responses.
•• Test—This technique is performed onto the sub­
mitted element by which functional, measurable
characteristics, operability, supportability, or perfor­
mance capability is quantitatively verified when
subjected to controlled conditions that are real or
simulated. Testing often uses special test equipment
or instrumentation to obtain accurate quantitative
data to be analyzed.
•• Analogy or similarity—This technique (often con­
sidered as a type of analysis technique) is based
on evidence of similar elements to the submitted
element or on experience feedback. It is absolutely
necessary to show by prediction that the context is

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Verification Process

invariant and that the outcomes are transposable
(e.g., models, investigations, experience feedback).
Analogy or similarity can only be used if the sub­
mitted element is similar in design, manufacture,
and use; equivalent or more stringent verification
actions were used for the similar element; and the
intended operational environment is identical to or
less rigorous than the similar element.
•• Simulation—This technique (often considered as a
type of analysis technique) is performed on models
or mock‐ups (not on the actual/physical elements)
for verifying features and performance as designed.
•• Sampling—This technique is based on verification
of characteristics using samples. The number, toler­
ance, and other characteristics must be specified and
be in agreement with the experience feedback.
Note: For techniques that do not include stimuli
of the system element, no characteristics (exogenous attributes) can be observed only properties
(endogenous attributes).

4.9.2.3 Integration, Verification, and Validation of
the System There is sometimes a misconception that
verification occurs after integration and before valida­
tion. In most of the cases, it is more appropriate to begin
Level

verification activities during development and to con­
tinue them into deployment and use.
Once system elements have been realized, their
integration to form the whole system is performed.
Integration assembles developed capabilities (via system
elements) in preparation for verification actions as stated
in the integration process (see Section 4.8).
4.9.2.4 Verification Level per Level Generally, the
SOI has a number of layers of systems (made up of system
elements at the next lower level). Thus, every system and
system element is verified, and any findings possibly
corrected before being integrated into the system of the
higher level, as shown in Figure 4.15. In this figure, every
time the term verify is used means that the corresponding
verification process is invoked.
As necessary, systems and system elements are partially
integrated in subsets (aggregates) in order to limit the
number of properties to be verified within a single step. For
each level, it is necessary to make sure by a set of verifica­
tion actions that features stated at preceding level are not
adversely affected. Moreover, a compliant result obtained in
a given environment can turn noncompliant if the environ­
ment changes. So, as long as the system is not completely
integrated and/or doesn’t operate in the real operational
environment, no result must be regarded as definitive.

System definition

Defined
system

n
Verify
requirements

n+1
Verify
requirements

Defined
systems
elements

87

System realization

Requirements
Verify
design
Design
characteristics

Verified final
product
Verify
against

Requirements
Verify
design
Design
characteristics

Verify
against

Realized
system

Realized
system
elements

Verified
products

Figure 4.15 Verification level per level. Reprinted with permission from Alain Faisandier. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

88

Technical Processes

4.10

Transition Process

4.10.1 Overview
4.10.1.1

Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,

[6.4.10.1] The purpose of the Transition process is to
establish a capability for a system to provide services
specified by stakeholder requirements in the operational
environment.

Ultimately, the transition process enables the transfer
of custody of the system and responsibility for system
support from one organizational entity to another. This
includes, but is not limited to, transfer of custody from
the development team to the organizations that will
subsequently operate and support the system. Successful
conclusion of the transition process typically marks the
beginning of the utilization stage of the SOI.

the specified system requirements in the intended
operational environment prior to allowing a change
in control, ownership, and/or custody. While this is a
relatively short process, it should be carefully planned
to avoid surprises and recrimination on either side of
the agreement. Additionally, transition plans should
be tracked and monitored to ensure all activities are
completed to both parties’ satisfaction, including
resolution of any issues arising during transition.
Figure 4.16 is the IPO diagram for the transition
process.
4.10.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
transition process are listed in Figure 4.16. Descriptions
of each input and output are provided in Appendix E.
4.10.1.4 Process Activities The transition process
includes the following activities:

4.10.1.2 Description The transition process installs
a verified system in the operational environment along
with relevant enabling systems, products, or services,
such as operator training systems, as defined in the
agreement. Using successful results from the verifica­
tion process, the acquirer accepts that the system meets

•• Prepare for the transition.
–– Plan for the transition of the system. The strategy
should include operator training, logistics
support, delivery strategy, and problem rectifica­
tion/resolution strategy.
–– Develop installation procedures.

Controls

Inputs
• Life cycle concepts
• Operator/maintainer
training material
• Final RTVM
• Verified system
• Verification report

Activities
• Prepare for the transition
• Perform the transition
• Manage results of
transition

Outputs
• Transition strategy
• Transition enabling system
requirements
• Transition constraints
• Installation procedure
• Installed system
• Trained operators and
maintainers
• Transition report
• Transition record

Enablers
Figure 4.16 IPO diagram for the transition process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and Walden. Usage per
the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Validation Process

–– Ensure that the necessary enabling systems,
products, or services required for transition are
available, when needed. The planning includes
the identification of requirements and interfaces
for the enablers. The acquisition of the enablers
can be done through various ways such as rental,
procurement, development, reuse, and subcon­
tracting. An enabler may be a complete enabling
system developed as a separate project from the
project of the SOI.
•• Perform the transition.
–– Using the installation procedures, install the
system.
–– Train the users in the proper use of the system and
affirm users have the knowledge and skill levels
necessary to perform operation and maintenance
activities. This includes a complete review and
handoff of operator and maintenance manuals, as
applicable.
–– Receive final confirmation that the installed
system can provide its required functions and can
be sustained by the enabling systems and ser­
vices. This process typically ends with a formal,
written acknowledgement that the system has
been properly installed and verified, that all
issues and action items have been resolved, and
that all agreements pertaining to development
and delivery of a fully supportable system have
been fully satisfied or adjudicated.
–– After the demonstration of functionality in the
operational site and any review for operational
readiness, the system can be placed into service.
•• Manage results of transition.
–– Postimplementation incidents and problems are
captured and may lead to corrective actions or
changes to the requirements. The quality assurance
process is used for the incident and problem reso­
lution that is reported during performance of the
transition process.
–– Record anomalies observed during the transition
process. These provide awareness of the results,
information needed to address anomalies, and a
historical record. Anomalies may stem from the
transition strategy, supporting enabling systems,
interfaces, etc. The project assessment and con­
trol process is used to analyze the anomalies and
determine what, if any, action is needed.

89

–– Maintain bidirectional traceability of the transi­
tioned system elements with the transition
strategy, system architecture, design, and system
requirements.
–– Provide baseline information for configuration
management.
Common approaches and tips:
•• When acceptance activities cannot be conducted
within the operational environment, a representa­
tive locale is selected.
•• This process relies heavily on quality assurance and
configuration management documentation.

4.11 Validation Process
4.11.1 Overview
4.11.1.1

Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,

[6.4.11.1] The purpose of the Validation process is to
provide objective evidence that the system, when in
use, fulfills its business or mission objectives and stake­
holder requirements, achieving its intended use in its
intended operational environment.

4.11.1.2 Description The validation process is applied
to a SOI, or any system or system element that composes
it, at the appropriate points in the life cycle stages to pro­
vide confidence that the right system (or system element)
has been built.
The validation process can be applied to any
system element or engineering item of the system or
its definition that has been defined or realized (e.g.,
validation of a stakeholder requirement, a system
requirement, a function, an input/output flow, a system
element, an interface, a design property, an integration
aggregate, a validation procedure). Thus, the validation
process is performed to help ensure that the system
or any system element meets the need of its stakeholder
in the life cycle (i.e., the engineering processes and the
transformation of inputs produced what was intended—
the “right” result).
Validation is a transverse activity to every life cycle
stage of the system. In particular, during the development
of the system, validation applies to any process/activity
and product resulting from the process/activity.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

90

Technical Processes

The validation process works closely with other life
cycle processes. For example, the business or mission
analysis process establishes a targeted operational capa­
bility. The operational capability (e.g., mission or business
profile and operational scenarios) is transformed by the
stakeholder needs and requirements definition process
into stakeholder needs and requirements. The validation
process works concurrently with these processes to define
the applicable validation actions and validation proce­
dures through the life cycle to ensure the system evolves
in a way that there is a high level of confidence that the
operational capability will be provided, as refined in the
stakeholder needs and requirements.
Figure 4.17 is the IPO diagram for the validation
process.
4.11.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
validation process are listed in Figure 4.17. Descriptions
of each input and output are provided in Appendix E.
4.11.1.4 Process Activities The validation process
includes the following activities:
•• Prepare for validation.
–– Establish the validation strategy, which is often
part of a validation plan, that optimizes the number

and type of validation actions while minimizing
costs and risks:
°° Identify the stakeholders who will be involved
in the validation activities and define their
roles and responsibilities. This can include
the acquirer, the supplier, and a third‐party
representative.
°° The scope of the validation plan is dependent
on the life cycle stage and the progress within
it. Validation may be appropriate for the full
system, a system element, or an artifact, such
as the ConOps or a prototype, in addition to
the delivered system.
°° Establish a list of validation constraints that
need to be considered. The constraints could
impact the implementation of the validation
actions and include contractual constraints,
limitations due to regulatory requirements,
cost, schedule, feasibility to exercise a function
(such as in some ordinance), safety consider­
ations, physical configurations, accessibility,
etc.
With
appropriate consideration to the con­
°°
straints, select suitable validation approach
to be applied, such as inspection, analysis,

Controls

Inputs
• Life cycle concepts
• Stakeholder requirements
• Final RVTM
• Installed system
• Transition report
• Validation criteria

Activities
• Prepare for validation
• Perform validation
• Manage results of
validation

Outputs
• Validation strategy
• Validation enabling system
requirements
• Validation constraints
• Validation procedure
• Validated requirements
• Validated system
• Validation report
• Validation record

Enablers
Figure 4.17 IPO diagram for the validation process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and Walden. Usage per
the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Validation Process

demonstration, or test, depending on the life
cycle stage. Identify any enablers needed.
°° It may be necessary to prioritize the valida­
tion actions. The validation actions should be
prioritized and evaluated against constraints,
risks, type of system, project objectives, and
other relevant criteria.
°° Determine if there are any validation gaps
and that the resulting validation actions will
provide an acceptable level of confidence that
the system or system element will meet the
identified needs.
Ensure
appropriate scheduling via the project
°°
planning process to meet the requirements
for the execution of the validation actions in
the applicable project steps.
°° Define the configuration of submitted items to
validation actions.
–– Identify validation constraints on the system, aris­
ing from the validation strategy, to be incorporated
in the stakeholder requirements. This includes
practical limitations of accuracy, uncertainty,
repeatability that are imposed by the validation
enablers, the associated measurement methods,
and the availability, accessibility, and intercon­
nection with enablers.
–– Ensure that the necessary enabling systems,
products, or services required for the validation
actions are available, when needed. The planning
includes the identification of requirements and
interfaces for the enablers. An enabler may be a
complete enabling system developed as a sepa­
rate project from the project of the SOI.
•• Perform validation.
–– Develop the validation procedures that support
the validation actions.
–– Ensure readiness to conduct validation: avail­
ability and configuration status of the system/
item, the availability of the validation enablers,
qualified personnel or operators, resources, etc.
–– Conduct validation actions in accordance with
the procedures. This should include performing
the actions in the operational environment or one
as close to it as possible. During the conduct of
the validation actions, record the results of the
actions, as they are performed.

91

•• Manage results of validation.
–– Identify and record validation results and enter
data in the validation report (including any
necessary updates to the RVTM). Maintain the
records per organizational policy.
–– Record anomalies observed during the validation
process, and analyze and resolve the anomalies
(corrective actions or improvements) using the
quality assurance process (see Section 5.8).
°° Ensure the results and anomalies and/or non­
conformances are analyzed using the project
assessment and control process.
°° Compare the obtained results with the expected
results; deduce the degree of conformance of
the submitted item (i.e., provides the services
expected by the stakeholder); decide whether
the degree of conformance is acceptable.
°° Problem resolution is handled through the
quality assurance and project assessment and
control processes. Changes to the system or
system element definition (i.e., requirements,
architecture, design, or interfaces) and asso­
ciated engineering artifacts are performed
within other technical processes.
–– Obtain acquirer (or other authorized stakeholders)
acceptance of validation results.
–– Maintain bidirectional traceability of the vali­
dated system elements with the validation strategy,
business/mission analysis, stakeholder require­
ments, system architecture, design, and system
requirements.
–– Provide baseline information for configuration
management.
–– Update the validation strategy and schedule
according to the progress of the project; in
particular, planned validation actions can be rede­
fined or rescheduled as necessary.
Common approaches and tips:
•• Validation methods during the business and mission
analysis process include assessment of OpsCon
through operational scenarios that exercise all system
operational modes and demonstrating system‐level
performance over the entire operating regime. The
architects and designers use the results of this activity

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

92

Technical Processes

to forecast success in meeting the expectations of
users and the acquirer, as well as to provide feedback
to identify and correct performance deficiencies
before implementation (Engel, 2010).
•• It is recommended to start the drafting of the valida­
tion plan as soon as the first OpsCon and scenarios
and stakeholder requirements are known. Early
consideration of potential validation methods or
techniques allows the project to anticipate con­
straints, estimate cost, and start the acquisition of
validation enablers such as test facilities, simulators,
etc., avoiding cost overruns and schedule slippages.
•• Validation is applied to the operational system,
but is most effective if it is also applied earlier by
analysis, simulation, emulation, etc. of anticipated
operational characteristics.
•• A key output of validation is the assurance provided
of the loci of system dynamic and integrity limits.
These envelopes provide actionable knowledge for
users to determine system suitability, anticipated
effectiveness, survivability, and refurbishment.
•• Validation also reveals the effects the SOI may have
on collateral, enabling, or interoperating systems.
Validation actions and analysis should include these
system interactions in the scope.
•• Involve the broadest range of stakeholders with vali­
dation. Often, the end users and other relevant stake­
holders are involved in the validation activities.
•• If possible, involve users/operators with validation.
Validation will often involve going back directly
to the users to have them perform some sort of
acceptance test under their own local conditions.
4.11.2

Elaboration

4.11.2.1 Notion of Validation Action A validation
action describes what must be validated (e.g., an opera­
tional scenario, a requirement, or a set of requirements
as reference), on which item (e.g., requirement, function,
interface, system element, system), the expected result
(deduced from the reference), the validation technique
to apply (e.g., inspection, analysis, demonstration, test),
and on which level of the system hierarchy (e.g., SOI,
intermediate level system element, leaf level system
element).
The definition of a validation action applied to an
engineering item (e.g., stakeholder requirement, system

requirement, function, interface, system element,
procedure, document) includes the identification of the
item on which the validation action will be performed,
the reference used to define the expected result, and the
appropriate validation technique.
The performance of a validation action onto the
submitted item provides an obtained result which is
compared with the expected result. The comparison
enables the project to judge the element’s acceptabil­
ity regarding the relevance in the context of use (see
Fig. 4.18).
Examples of validation actions:
•• Validation of a requirement—To make sure its
content is justified and relevant to stakeholder
needs or expectations.
•• Validation of an engineering artifact (architecture,
design, etc.)—To make sure its content is justified
and relevant to stakeholder needs or expectations
and contributes to achieving the mission or business
profile and operational scenarios.
•• Validation of a system (product, service, or
enterprise)—To demonstrate that the product, ser­
vice, or enterprise satisfies its stakeholder require­
ments, mission or business profile, and operational
scenarios.
4.11.2.2 Validation Techniques The validation
techniques are the same as those used for verification
(see Section 4.9.2.2), but the purposes are different;
verification is used to show compliance with the spec­
ified system requirements and to detect errors/defects/
faults, whereas validation is to prove satisfaction of
the desired operational capability through showing
operational scenarios and stakeholder requirements
can be met.
A Requirements and Validation Traceability Matrix
may be used to record data such as validation action
list, selected validation method/technique to validate
implementation of every engineering item (in particular,
operational scenarios and stakeholder requirements),
the expected results, and the obtained results when a
validation action has been performed. The use of such
a matrix enables the project team to ensure that selected
operational scenarios and stakeholder requirements
have been validated, or to evaluate the percentage of
validation actions completed.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Validation Process

93

Item

Reference

Used by

Submitted to
V & V action

Defines

Produces

Expected result

Obtained result
Comparison

Yes

Conformance?
Verification

Yes

No

Uncertainty

Acceptable?

No

Validation
Figure 4.18 Definition and usage of a validation action. Reprinted with permission from Alain Faisandier. All other rights reserved.

4.11.2.3 Validation, OperationalValidation, Acceptance,
and Certification
Validation and Operational Validation Validation
concerns the global system seen as a whole and is based
on the totality of requirements (system requirements,
ments). It is obtained gradually
stakeholder require­
throughout the development stage by pursuing several
nonexclusive ways:
•• Cumulating V&V actions’ results provided by
application of the corresponding processes to every
engineering item
•• Performing final validation actions onto the
complete integrated system in an industrial environ­
ment (as close as possible to the future operational
environment)
•• Performing operational validation actions onto the
complete system in its operational environment
(context of use)

The goal is to completely validate the system capa­
bility to meet all requirements prior to the production
and utilization stages. Problems uncovered in these
stages are very costly to correct. As such, early discovery
of deviations from requirements reduces overall project
risk and helps the project deliver a successful, low‐cost
system. Validation results are an important element of
decision gate reviews.
Acceptance Acceptance is an activity conducted prior
to transition such that the acquirer can decide that the
system is ready to change ownership from supplier to
acquirer. A set of operational validation actions is often
exercised, or a review of validation results is systematically
performed.
Certification Certification is a written assurance that
the product or article has been developed, and can
perform its assigned functions, in accordance with legal
or industrial standards (e.g., for aircraft). The development

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

94

Technical Processes

reviews, verification results, and validation results form
the basis for certification. However, certification is
typically performed by outside authorities, without
direction as to how the requirements are to be verified.
For example, this method is used for electronics devices
via Conformité Européenne (CE) certification in Europe
and Underwriters Laboratories (UL) certification in the
United States and Canada.
Readiness for Use As part of the analysis of the
validation results, the project team needs to make a
readiness for use assessment. This may occur many
times in the life cycle, including the first article delivery,
completion of production (if more than a single system is
produced), and following maintenance actions. In the
field, particularly after maintenance, it is necessary to
establish whether the system is ready for use.
Qualification The system qualification requires that all
V&V actions have been successfully performed. These
V&V actions cover not only the SOI itself but also all the
interfaces with its environment (e.g., for a space system,
the validation of the interface between space segment

Level

and ground segment). The qualification process has to
demonstrate that the characteristics or properties of the
realized system, including margins, meet the applicable
system requirements and/or stakeholder requirements.
The qualification is concluded by an acceptance review
and/or an operational readiness review.
As illustration of this, for a space system, the last step
of the qualification is covered by the first launch or the
first flight. This first flight needs to be milestoned by a
flight readiness review that will verify that the flight and
ground segments including all supporting systems such
as tracking systems, communication systems, and safety
systems are ready for launch. A complementary review
can be held just before launch (launch readiness review)
to authorize the launch. A successful launch participates
to the qualification process, but the final system qualifi­
cation is achieved only after in‐orbit tests for a spacecraft
or even several flights for a launcher in order to cover
the different missions for which the system has been
developed.
4.11.2.4 Validation Level per Level Generally, the
SOI has been decomposed during architecture definition

System definition

System realization

Stakeholder
requirements,
operational
scenarios

Validate
against

Realized
system

Defined
system

n
Validate
requirements

n+1

Stakeholder
requirements,
operational
scenarios
Defined
system
elements

Validate
against

Realized
system
elements

Delivery of
validated
system

Delivery of
validated
system
elements

Validate
requirements

Figure 4.19 Validation level per level. Note: System requirements are validated against the stakeholder requirements. Reprinted
with permission from Alain Faisandier. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Operation Process

in a set of layers of systems; thus, every system and
system element is validated and possibly corrected before
being integrated into the parent system of the higher
level, as shown in Figure 4.19. In this figure, every time
the term validate is used means that the corresponding
validation process is invoked.
As necessary, systems and system elements are
partially integrated in subsets (aggregates) in order to
limit the number of properties to be validated within a
single step. For each level, it is necessary to make sure
by a set of final validation actions that features stated at
preceding level are not adversely affected. Moreover, a
compliant result obtained in a given environment can
turn noncompliant if the environment changes. So, as
long as the system is not completely integrated and/or
doesn’t operate in the real operational environment, no
result must be regarded as definitive.
4.12

Operation Process

4.12.1
4.12.1.1

Overview
Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,

[6.4.12.1] The purpose of the Operation process is to use
the system to deliver its services.

95

This process is often executed concurrent with the
maintenance process.
4.12.1.2 Description The operation process sus­
tains system services by preparing for the operation of
the system, supplying personnel to operate the system,
monitoring operator–system performance, and moni­
toring the system performance. When the system
replaces an existing system, it may be necessary to
manage the migration between systems such that per­
sistent stakeholders do not experience a breakdown in
services.
The utilization and support stages of a system
­usually account for the largest portion of the total
LCC. If system performance falls outside acceptable
parameters, this may indicate the need for corrective
actions in accordance with the support concept and
any ­associated agreements. When the system or any
of its constituent elements reach the end of their
planned or useful life, the system may enter the dis­
posal process (see Section 4.14). Figure 4.20 is the
IPO diagram for the operation process.
4.12.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
operation process are listed in Figure 4.20. Descriptions
of each input and output are provided in Appendix E.

Controls

Inputs
• Life cycle concepts
• Operator/maintainer
Training materials
• Trained operators and
maintainers
• Validated system
• Validation report
• Maintenance report

Activities
• Prepare for operation
• Perform operation
• Manage results of
operation
• Support the customer

Outputs
• Operation strategy
• Operation enabling system
requirements
• Operation constraints
• Operation report
• Operation record

Enablers
Figure 4.20 IPO diagram for the operation process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and Walden. Usage per
the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

96

Technical Processes

4.12.1.4 Process Activities The operation process
includes the following activities:
•• Prepare for operation.
–– Plan for operation, including the development of
the strategy:
°° Establish availability of equipment, services,
and personnel and performance tracking
system.
°° Verify schedules for personnel and facilities
(on a multishift basis if appropriate).
Define
business rules related to modifications
°°
that sustain existing or enhanced services.
°° Implement the OpsCon and environmental
strategies.
°° Review operational performance measures,
thresholds, and criteria.
Verify
all personnel have had the applicable
°°
system safety training.
–– Feed back any operation constraints on the system
or system elements to the system requirements
definition, architecture definition, or design defi­
nition processes.
–– Ensure that the necessary enabling systems,
products, or services required for operation are
available, when needed. The planning includes
the identification of requirements and interfaces
for the enablers. The acquisition of the enablers
can be done through various ways such as rental,
procurement, development, reuse, and subcon­
tracting. An enabler may be a complete enabling
system developed as a separate project from the
project of the SOI.
–– Identify operator skill sets and train operators to
operate the system.
•• Perform operation.
–– Operate the system according to the OpsCon.
–– Track system performance and account for
operational availability. This includes operating
the system in a safe manner and performing
operational analysis to determine system
noncompliance.
–– When abnormal operational conditions warrant,
conduct planned contingency actions. Perform
system contingency operations, if necessary.

•• Manage results of operation.
–– Document the results of operations.
–– Record anomalies observed during the operation
process, and analyze and resolve the anomalies
(corrective actions or improvements) using the
quality assurance process (see Section 5.8).
Implementation of procedures for restoring oper­
ations to a safe state should be followed. Maintain
bidirectional traceability of the operations ele­
ments with the operation strategy, business/
mission analysis, ConOps, OpsCon, and stake­
holder requirements.
•• Support the customer.
–– Perform tasks needed to address customer
requests.
4.12.2

Elaboration

4.12.2.1 Operation Enabling Systems The operation
process includes other enabling systems that need to be
considered that may be different from other processes.
The following amplifies on these:
•• Operational environment—The circumstances sur­
rounding and potentially affecting something that is
operating. For example, electronic or mechanical
equipment may be affected by high temperatures,
vibration, dust, and other parameters that constitute
the operating environment.
•• Training systems—Provides operators with knowl­
edge and skills required for proper system
operations.
•• Technical data—Procedures, guidelines, and check­
lists needed for proper operation of the system,
including prerequisites for operation, procedures
for activation and checkout of the system, operating
procedures, procedures for monitoring system
performance, procedures for problem resolution,
and procedures for shutting the system down.
•• Facilities and infrastructure—Facilities (e.g., build­
ings, airfields, ports, roadways) and infrastructure
(e.g., IT services, fuel, water, electrical service)
required for system operation.
•• Sustaining engineering—Monitors system perfor­
mance, conducts failure analysis, and proposes
corrective actions to sustain required operational
capabilities.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Maintenance Process

•• Maintenance planning and management—With
the goal of minimizing system downtime, planned
and/or preventive maintenance is performed to sus­
tain system operations. The maintenance system
responds to operator trouble/problem reports, con­
ducts corrective maintenance, and restores system
for operations.
4.13

later life cycle stages are used to influence the system
requirements, architecture, and design. Figure 4.21 is the
IPO diagram for the maintenance process.
4.13.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
maintenance process are listed in Figure 4.21. Descriptions
of each input and output are provided in Appendix E.
4.13.1.4 Process Activities The maintenance process
includes the following activities:

Maintenance Process

4.13.1 Overview
4.13.1.1

97

Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,

[6.4.13] The purpose of the Maintenance process is to
sustain the capability of the system to provide a service.

4.13.1.2 Description Maintenance includes the
activities to provide operations support, logistics, and
material management. Based on feedback from ongoing
monitoring of the operational environment, problems are
identified, and corrective, remedial, or preventive actions
are taken to restore full system capability. This process
contributes to the system requirements definition process,
architecture definition process, and design definition
process when considerations of constraints imposed in

•• Prepare for maintenance.
–– Plan for maintenance, including the development
of the strategy, that includes the following:
°° Sustained service across the life cycle in order
to meet customer requirements and achieve cus­
tomer satisfaction. The strategy should define
the types of maintenance actions (preventive,
corrective, modification) and levels of mainte­
nance (operator, in situ, factory).
°° The various types of maintenance actions,
including corrective maintenance (addressing
failures or problems), adaptive maintenance
(addressing changes needed to accommodate
system evolution), perfective maintenance
(addressing enhancements), and scheduled

Controls

Inputs
• Life cycle concepts
• Operator/maintainer
training materials
• Trained operator and
maintainers
• Validated system
• Validation report
• Operation report

Activities
• Prepare for maintenance
• Perform maintenance
• Perform logistics support
• Manage results of
maintenance and logistics

Outputs
• Maintenance strategy
• Maintenance enabling
system requirements
• Maintenance constraints
• Maintenance procedure
• Maintenance report
• Maintenance record

Enablers
Figure 4.21 IPO diagram for the maintenance process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and Walden. Usage
per the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

98

Technical Processes

preventive maintenance (addressing routine
servicing to prevent failures) while mini­
mizing operational downtime.
°° The approach to address logistics needs across
the life cycle, considering the following:
–– Approach to manage spare parts or system
elements (e.g., number, type, storage, loca­
tion, shelf life, conditions, renewal fre­
quency). Analysis includes requirements
and plans for packaging, handling, storage,
and transportation (PHS&T).
–– Anticounterfeit approach (i.e., prevention
of counterfeit system elements, especially
parts, in the supply chain).
–– Identify or define sources of technical
data and training needed to support
maintenance.
–– Identify or define the skills, training,
qualifications, and number of personnel
for maintenance. Consider any regulatory
requirements that drive the need for
specific skills, such as safety or security.
–– Feed back any maintenance constraints on
the system or system elements to the system
requirements definition, architecture definition,
or design definition processes.
–– Use the system analysis process to support any
trades needed of the maintenance strategy and
approach to ensure affordability, feasibility,
supportability, and sustainability of the system
maintenance.
°° Ensure that the necessary enabling systems,
products, or services required for mainte­
nance are available, when needed. The planning
includes the identification of requirements and
interfaces for the enablers. The acquisition
of the enablers can be done through various
ways such as rental, procurement, development,
reuse, and subcontracting. An enabler may be
a complete enabling system developed as a
separate project from the project of the SOI.
°° Assign trained, qualified personnel to be
maintainers.
•• Perform maintenance.
–– Develop maintenance procedures for preventive
and corrective maintenance.

–– Identify, record, and resolve system anomalies.
–– Restore system operation after a failure.
–– Plan future maintenance by reviewing and ana­
lyzing anomaly reports.
–– Initiate analysis and corrective action to remedy
previously undetected design errors.
–– Per the identified schedule, perform preventive
maintenance actions using defined maintenance
procedures.
–– Determine the need for adaptive or perfective.
•• Perform logistics support.
–– Conduct acquisition logistics actions—Includes
performing trade studies and analysis to determine
the most cost‐effective means to support the
system across the life cycle. Design influence
­considers features that impact the inherent reli­
ability and maintainability of system services con­
trasted with the affordability of other support
options including the use of spare parts. Design
considerations are often constrained by availability
requirements, the impact of supply chain manage­
ment, manpower restrictions, and system afford­
ability. Acquisition logistics plans for and develops
strategies for system life cycle supportability
(maintenance, supply support, support equipment,
staffing, and enabling systems) concurrently with
the definition of the system requirements.
–– Conduct
operational
logistics
actions—
Operational logistics is the concurrent tuning of
both the SOI and enabling systems throughout the
operational life to ensure effective and efficient
delivery of system capabilities. Operational logis­
tics actions enable the system to achieve required
operational readiness. The actions include staff­
ing, maintenance management, supply support,
support equipment, technical data needs (e.g.,
manuals, instructions, lists), training support,
sustaining engineering, computing resources,
and facilities. Operational logistics provides a rich
source of data concerning the operational
performance of the system. This data should be
used to support trend analysis and provides a
direct feedback loop on system effectiveness and
efficiency and insight into customer satisfaction.
•• Manage results of maintenance and logistics.
–– Document the results of the maintenance process.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Maintenance Process

–– Record anomalies observed during the mainte­
nance process, and analyze and resolve the
anomalies (corrective actions or improvements)
using the quality assurance process (see
Section 5.8). Identify and record trends of main­
tenance and logistics actions.
–– Maintain bidirectional traceability of the mainte­
nance actions and the applicable system elements
and system definition artifacts.
–– Obtain feedback from customers to understand
the level of satisfaction with the maintenance and
logistics support.
4.13.2

Elaboration

Maintenance is a term often used to refer to a phase dur­
ing which the system is already operational and the pri­
mary activities are related to sustaining the capability of
the system, system enhancement, upgrades, and modern­
ization (Patanakul and Shenhar, 2010). In this context,
the objective is to design the system from the start to
allow for the possibility of maintaining value over the
entire system life cycle, thereby promoting value sus­
tainment (Ross et al., 2008). Since operations and main­
tenance costs generally comprise a significant percent
of total LCC, maintenance is an important part of the
system definition, often linked to logistics engineering,
disposal, and environmental impact analysis.
Maintenance helps ensure that a system continues to
satisfy its objective over its intended lifetime. In that
timeframe, system expectations will expand, environ­
ments in which the system is operated will change, tech­
nology will evolve, and elements of the system may
become unsupportable and need to be replaced. The
COTS desktop computing environment is a case in point.
Since the introduction of USB printers, it is difficult to
find cables to support parallel port printers.
Maintenance is an integrated effort designed to
address aging systems and a need to maintain those sys­
tems in operation. A maintenance program may include
reengineering electronic and mechanical elements to cope
with obsolescence, developing automated test equipment,
and extending the life of aging systems through tech­
nology insertion enhancements and proactive mainte­
nance (Herald et al., 2009). There are two main mitigation
strategies that help users cope with the performance
capability gap: a performance‐based logistics (PBL)

99

approach known as performance‐based life cycle prod­
uct support and technology refreshment programs
(TRPs) (Sols et al., 2012).
An open system architecture approach has been found
to improve the ability to insert new capabilities (threat
evolution), reduce development time, reduce mainte­
nance cost, generate affordable COTS obsolescence
management, and increase human systems integration.
Open architectures enable a more capable, reliable, adapt­
able, and resilient system that accommodates continuous
organizational and technology changes (Jackson and
Ferris, 2013).
4.13.2.1 Maintenance Concept The maintenance
concept is an important life cycle concept document.
The following are recommended details that should be
considered:
•• Types of maintenance
–– Corrective maintenance—Processes and proce­
dures for restoring system services to normal
operations (e.g., remove and replace hardware,
reload software, apply a software patch). Includes
postmaintenance test procedures to verify that
the system is ready for operations. Time spent
troubleshooting can be greatly reduced by well‐
engineered diagnostic capabilities such as built‐
in test (BIT).
–– Preventive maintenance—Processes and proce­
dures for scheduled/routine maintenance actions
(e.g., cleaning, filter changes, visual inspections)
needed to sustain optimal system operational
performance.
–– System modifications—Processes and proce­
dures intended to extend (sustain) the useful life
of the system or to provide new (upgrade) system
capabilities.
•• Levels of maintenance/repair
–– User/operator maintenance—Some routine and
simple maintenance tasks are able to be per­
formed by the system operators or users.
Operator maintenance includes routine (e.g.,
filter changes, recording data) and corrective
(e.g., “software” resets, install a ready spare,
tire change) tasks.
–– In situ maintenance and repair (sometimes
referred to as “field” maintenance)—Maintenance

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

100

Technical Processes

tasks performed by a trained maintainer at, or
near, the operational location.
–– Factory (maintenance, repair, and overhaul)
(sometimes referred to as “depot” maintenance)—
Major maintenance tasks that require advanced
maintenance skills and special tooling/equipment
not available at the operational location.
4.13.2.2 Maintenance Enabling Systems The main­
tenance process includes other enabling systems that
need to be considered that can be different from other
processes. The following amplifies on these:
•• Operational environment—The circumstances sur­
rounding and potentially affecting something that is
operating. For example, electronic or mechanical
equipment may be affected by high temperatures,
vibration, dust, and other parameters that constitute
the operating environment.
•• Supply support/PHS&T—Consists of all actions,
necessary to determine requirements and to acquire,
catalog, receive, store, transfer, package, transport,
issue, and dispose of spares, repair parts, and
supplies needed to sustain required level of opera­
tions (e.g., system availability). The reliability of
the system is impacted when a maintenance action
is delayed by the supply system.
•• Training systems—Provides maintainers with
knowledge and skills required for proper system
maintenance.
•• Technical data—Procedures, guidelines, and
checklists needed for proper maintenance of the
system, including preventive actions (clean and
adjust), analysis and diagnostics, fault iso­lation,
fault localization, parts lists, corrective mainte­
nance (remove and replace), calibration, modifi­
cation and upgrade instructions, postmaintenance
validation, etc. For systems with condition‐
based maintenance (CBM) capabilities, the
technical documentation will include information
on how those capabilities are used to support
maintenance.
•• Facilities and infrastructure—Facilities (e.g., build­
ings, warehouses, hangars, waterways) and infra­
structure (e.g., IT services, fuel, water, electrical
service, machine shops, dry docks, test ranges)
required for system maintenance.

•• Tools and support equipment—Common and spe­
cial purpose tools (e.g., hand tools, meters) and
support equipment (e.g., test sets, cranes) used to
support system maintenance.
•• Design interface/sustaining engineering—Design
interface attempts to “design in” supportability
features of the system. Supportability consider­
ations minimize the logistics footprint, maximize
reliability, ensure effective maintainability, and
address the long‐term issues related to obsoles­
cence management, technology refreshment, modi­
fications and upgrades, and overall usage under
all operating conditions. Sustaining engineering
ensures the continued operation and maintenance
of a system with managed (i.e., known) risk.
Activities include collection and analysis of use and
maintenance data; analysis of safety hazards, failure
causes and effects, reliability and maintainability
trends, and operational usage profile changes; root
cause analysis of in‐service problems (including
operational hazards, problem reports, parts obso­
lescence, corrosion effects, and reliability degra­
dation); development of required design changes
to resolve operational issues; and other activities
necessary to ensure cost‐effective support to achieve
required levels of readiness and performance over
the system’s life cycle.
•• Maintenance planning and management—The focus
of the maintenance planning process is to define
accessibility, diagnostics, repair, and sparing require­
ments; identify factors that impact the system’s
designed utilization rates (e.g., maintenance man‐
hours per maintenance action, maintenance ratios);
identify life cycle supportability design, installation,
maintenance, and operating constraints and guide­
lines; and provide Level of Repair Analysis (LORA).
4.13.2.3 Maintenance Techniques The following
are some maintenance techniques that can be used for
the SOI. This is by no means an exhaustive list:
•• Condition-Based Maintenance (CBM) is a
strategy to improve system reliability (by reducing
the amount of time the system is unavailable
while conducting routine or corrective mainte­
nance). Well‐designed systems include the cost‐
effective use of sensors (e.g., airflow, vibration,

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Disposal Process

thermal, viscosity) and integrated, analysis‐based
decision support capabilities to determine/predict
the need for maintenance actions required to pre­
vent a failure. System technical documents will
include a description of any embedded condition
based maintenance capabilities and how resultant
maintenance actions will be performed.
•• Reliability‐centered maintenance (RCM) is a cost‐
effective maintenance strategy to address dominant
causes of equipment failures [supported by failure
modes, effects, and criticality analysis (FMECA)
and fault tree analysis (FTA)]. It provides a system­
atic approach to defining a routine maintenance
program composed of cost‐effective tasks that pre­
serve important functions. SAE International (SAE)
JA1011:2009 provides detailed information on the
RCM process. RCM is a strategy to improve system
reliability (by reducing the amount of time the
system is unavailable while conducting routine or
preventive maintenance).
•• Performance‐based life cycle product support is a
strategy for cost‐effective system support. Rather
than contracting for maintenance (goods and ser­
vices) needed to sustain operations, the customer
and the service provider(s) agree on the delivery of
performance outcomes (defined by performance
metric(s) for a system or product). When properly
implemented, the provider is incentivized (increased
profits or contract extensions) to develop sustain­
ment strategies (e.g., system reliability investment,
inventory management practices, logistics arrange­
ments) necessary to meet the required performance
outcomes at reduced costs. PBL approaches usu­
ally result in sustained performance outcomes at
a lower cost than those achieved under a non‐PBL
or transactional product support arrangements for
system material and maintenance.

4.14

Disposal Process

4.14.1
4.14.1.1

Overview
Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,

[6.4.14.1] The purpose of the Disposal process is to
end the existence of a system element or system for a
specified intended use, appropriately handle replaced

101

or retired elements, and to properly attend to identified
critical disposal needs.

The disposal process is conducted in accordance with
applicable guidance, policy, regulations, and statutes
throughout the system life cycle.
4.14.1.2 Description Disposal is a life cycle support
process because concurrent consideration of disposal
during the development stage generates requirements
and constraints that must be balanced with defined stake­
holders’ requirements and other design considerations.
Further, environmental concerns drive the designer to
consider reclaiming the materials or recycling them
into new systems. This process can be applied for the
incremental disposal requirements at any point in the life
cycle, for example, prototypes that are not to be reused
or evolved, waste materials during manufacturing, or
parts that are replaced during maintenance. Figure 4.22
is the IPO diagram for the disposal process.
4.14.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
disposal process are listed in Figure 4.22. Descriptions
of each input and output are provided in Appendix E.
4.14.1.4 Process Activities The disposal process
includes any steps necessary to return the environment to
an acceptable condition; handle all system elements and
waste products in an environmentally sound manner in
accordance with applicable legislation, organizational
constraints, and stakeholder agreements; and document
and retain records of disposal activities, as required
for monitoring by external oversight or regulatory
agencies. In general, disposal process includes the fol­
lowing activities:
•• Prepare for disposal.
–– Review the retirement concept (may be called
concept of disposal), including any hazardous
materials and other environmental impacts to be
encountered during disposal.
–– Plan for disposal, including the development of
the strategy.
–– Impose associated constraints on the system
requirements.
–– Ensure that the necessary enabling systems,
products, or services required for disposal are

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

102

Technical Processes

Controls

Inputs

Activities

• Life cycle concepts
• Validated system
• Operation report
• Maintenance report

• Prepare for disposal
• Perform disposal
• Finalize the disposal

Outputs
• Disposal strategy
• Disposal enabling system
requirements
• Disposal constraints
• Disposal procedure
• Disposed system
• Disposal report
• Disposal record

Enablers
Figure 4.22 IPO diagram for the disposal process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and Walden. Usage per the
INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

available, when needed. The planning includes
the identification of requirements and interfaces
for the enablers. The acquisition of the enablers
can be done through various ways such as rental,
procurement, development, reuse, and subcon­
tracting. An enabler may be a complete enabling
system developed as a separate project from the
project of the SOI.
–– Identify elements that can be reused and that
cannot be reused. Methods need to be imple­
mented to prevent hazardous materials from reuse
in the supply chain.
–– Specify containment facilities, storage locations,
inspection criteria, and storage periods, if the
system is to be stored.
•• Perform disposal.
–– Decommission the system elements to be
terminated.
–– Disassemble the elements for ease of handling.
Include identification and processing of reusable
elements.
–– Extract all elements and waste materials that are
no longer needed—this includes removing mate­
rials from storage sites, consigning the elements
and waste products for destruction or permanent

storage, and ensuring that the waste products
cannot get back into the supply chain.
–– Dispose of deactivated system element per dis­
posal procedure.
–– Remove affected staff and capture the tacit
knowledge for future needs.
•• Finalize the disposal.
–– Confirm no adverse effects from the disposal
activities and return the environment to its
original state.
–– Maintain documentation of all disposal activities
and residual hazards.
Common approaches and tips:
•• The project team conducts analyses to develop
solutions for ultimate disposition of the system,
constituent elements, and waste products based
on evaluation of alternative disposal methods avail­
able. Methods addressed should include storing,
dismantling, reusing, recycling, reprocessing, and
destroying end products, enabling systems, system
elements, and materials.
•• Disposal analyses include consideration of costs,
disposal sites, environmental impacts, health and

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Disposal Process

safety issues, responsible agencies, handling and
shipping, supporting items, and applicable federal,
state, local, and host‐nation regulations.
•• Disposal analyses support selection of system ele­
ments and materials that will be used in the system
design and should be readdressed to consider design
and project impacts from changing laws and regula­
tions throughout the project life cycle.
•• Disposal strategy and design considerations are
updated throughout the system life cycle in response
to changes in applicable laws, regulations, and
policy.
•• Consider donating an obsolete system—Many
items, both systems and information, of cultural
and historical value have been lost to posterity
because museums and conservatories were not con­
sidered as an option during the retirement stage.

103

•• Concepts such as zero footprint and zero emis­
sions drive current trends toward corporate social
responsibility that influence decision making
regarding cleaner production and operational
environments and eventual disposal of depleted
materials and systems.
•• The ISO 14000 series includes standards for envi­
ronmental management systems and life cycle
assessment (ISO 14001, 2004).
•• Instead of designing cradle‐to‐grave products,
dumped in landfills at the end of their “life,” a
new concept is transforming industry by creating
products for cradle‐to‐cradle cycles, whose mate­
rials are perpetually circulated in closed loops.
Maintaining materials in closed loops maximizes
material value without damaging ecosystems
(McDonough, 2013).

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

5
Technical Management Processes

Within the system life cycle, the creation or upgrade
of products and services is managed by the conduct
of projects. For this reason, it is important to under­
stand the contribution of systems engineering (SE)
to the management of the project. Technical manage­
ment processes are defined in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288
as follows:
[6.3] The Technical Management Processes are used to
establish and evolve plans, to execute the plans, to assess
actual achievement and progress against the plans and
to control execution through to fulfillment. Individual
Technical Management Processes may be invoked at
any time in the life cycle and at any level …

Systems engineers continually interact with project
management. Systems engineers and project managers
bring unique skills and experiences to the program on
which they work. A life cycle from project manager’s
point of view (project start–project end) is defined dif­
ferently than from the systems engineer’s point of view
(product idea–product disposal). But there is a “shared
space” where systems engineers and project managers
have to collaborate to drive the team’s performance and
success (Langley et al., 2011).

Technical management processes include project
planning, project assessment and control, decision man­
agement, risk management, configuration management,
information management, measurement, and quality
assurance (QA). These processes are found throughout an
organization as they are essential to generic management
practices and apply both inside and outside the project
context. This chapter of the handbook focuses on processes
relevant to the technical coordination of a project.
5.1

Project Planning Process

5.1.1 Overview
5.1.1.1

Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,

[6.3.1.1] The purpose of the Project Planning process is
to produce and coordinate effective and workable plans.

5.1.1.2 Description Project planning starts with the
identification of a new potential project and continues
after the authorization and activation of the project until
its termination. The project planning process is performed
in the context of the organization. The life cycle model

INCOSE Systems Engineering Handbook: A Guide for System Life Cycle Processes and Activities, Fourth Edition.
Edited by David D. Walden, Garry J. Roedler, Kevin J. Forsberg, R. Douglas Hamelin and Thomas M. Shortell.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

104

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Project Planning Process

management process (see Section 7.1) establishes and
identifies relevant policies and procedures for managing
and executing a technical effort; identifying the technical
tasks, their interdependencies, risks, and opportunities;
and providing estimates of needed resources and bud­
gets. The planning includes the determination of the
need for specialized equipment, facilities, and special­
ists during the project to improve efficiency and effec­
tiveness and decrease cost overruns. This requires
coordination across the set of processes. For example,
different disciplines work together in the performance
of system requirements definition, architecture defini­
tion, and design definition processes to evaluate the
parameters such as manufacturability, testability, opera­
bility, maintainability, and sustainability against product
performance. Project tasking may be concurrent to
achieve the best results.
Project planning establishes the direction and infra­
structure necessary to enable the assessment and control
of the project progress and identifies the details of the
work and the right set of personnel, skills, and facilities
with a schedule for needed resources from within and

105

outside the organization. Figure 5.1 is the IPO diagram
for the project planning process.
5.1.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
project planning process are listed in Figure 5.1.
Descriptions of each input and output are provided in
Appendix E.
5.1.1.4 Process Activities The project planning
process includes the following activities:
•• Define the project.
–– Analyze the project proposal and related agree­
ments to define the project objectives, scope, and
constraints.
–– Establish tailoring of organization procedures and
practices to carry out planned effort. Chapter 8
contains a detailed discussion on tailoring.
–– Establish a work breakdown structure (WBS)
based on the evolving system architecture.
–– Define and maintain a life cycle model that is
tailored from the defined life cycle models of the

Controls

Inputs
• Organization strategic plan
• Source documents
• Supply response
• Project portfolio
• Life cycle models
• Project direction
• Strategy documents
• Project tailoring strategy
• Project lessons learned
• Documentation tree
• QM corrective actions
• Qualfied personnel
• Quality assurance plan

Activities
• Define the project
• Plan project and technical
management
• Activate the project

Outputs
• SEMP
• Project constraints
• Project infrastructure needs
• Project human resources
needs
• WBS
• Project schedule
• Project budget
• Acquisition need
• Project planning record

Enablers
Figure 5.1 IPO diagram for the project planning process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and Walden. Usage
per the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

106

Technical Management Processes

organization. This includes the identification
of major milestones, decision gates, and project
reviews.
•• Plan project and technical management.
–– Establish the roles and responsibilities for project
authority.
–– Define top‐level work packages for each task and
activity identified. Each work package should be
tied to required resources including procurement
strategies.
–– Develop a project schedule based on objectives
and work estimates.
–– Define the infrastructure and services required.
–– Define costs and estimate project budget.
–– Plan the acquisition of materials, goods, and
enabling system services.
–– Prepare a systems engineering management plan
(SEMP) or systems engineering plan (SEP),
including the reviews that will be performed
across the life cycle.
–– Generate or tailor quality management, configu­
ration management, risk management, information
management, and measurement plans to meet the
needs of the project (may be the SEMP or SEP for
smaller projects).
–– Establish the criteria to be used for major mile­
stones, decision gates, and internal reviews.
•• Activate the project.
Common approaches and tips:
•• The SEMP is an important outcome of planning
that identifies activities, key events, work pack­
ages, and resources. It references other planning
documents that are tailored for use on the project as
discussed in later sections of this chapter.
•• IPDTs are frequently used to break down commu­
nications and knowledge stovepipes within organi­
zations (Martin, 1996).
•• The creation of the WBS is an activity where SE and
project management intersect (Forsberg et al., 2005).
Sometimes, software engineers presume that these
tools apply only to large hardware projects, and they
avoid the project management tools needed for suc­
cess. Dr. Richard Fairley has documented an excel­
lent approach to dispel this notion (Fairley, 2009).

•• Skipping or taking shortcuts in the planning pro­
cess reduces the effectiveness of other technical
management processes.
•• Agile project management methods also include
planning—the cycles may be shorter and more fre­
quent, but planning is an essential process.
•• Defining project objectives and the criteria for suc­
cess are critical to successful projects. The project
value to the stakeholders should be clearly defined
to guide project decision making. The project value
should be expressed in technical performance mea­
sures (TPMs) (Roedler and Jones, 2006).
•• Incorporate risk assessment early in the planning
process to identify areas that need special attention
or contingencies. Always attend to the technical
risks (PMI, 2013).
•• The Project Management Institute is a source of
guidelines for project planning.
•• The ISO/IEC/IEEE 16326 standard for project
management also provides additional guidance on
this subject (ISO/IEC/IEEE 16326, 2009).
5.1.2

Elaboration

5.1.2.1 Project Planning Concepts Project planning
estimates the project budget and schedule against which
project progress will be assessed and controlled. Systems
engineers and project managers must collaborate in
project planning. Systems engineers perform technical
management activities consistent with project objec­
tives. Technical management activities include planning,
scheduling, reviewing, and auditing the SE process as
defined in the SEMP and the SE Master Schedule
(SEMS).
5.1.2.2 SEMP The SEMP is the top‐level plan for
managing the SE effort. It defines how the project will be
organized, structured, and conducted and how the total
engineering process will be controlled to provide a
product that satisfies stakeholder requirements. A well‐
written SEMP provides guidance to a project and helps
the organization avoid unnecessary discussions about
how to perform SE. Organizations generally maintain a
template of the SEMP suitable for tailoring and reuse.
Effective project control requires that there be a SEMP,
which the systems engineer keeps current and uses on
a daily basis to manage the team’s actions.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Project Planning Process

The SEMS is an essential part of the SEMP and a tool
for project control because it identifies the critical path
of technical activities in the project. Verification activ­
ities may also receive special attention in the SEMS. In
addition, the schedule of tasks and dependencies helps
justify requests for personnel and resources needed
throughout the development life cycle.
The SEMP and SEMS are supported by a project
or contract WBS that defines a project task hierarchy.
Work authorization is the process by which the project
is baselined and financially controlled. A description of
the organization procedures for starting work on a part
of the WBS may be defined in the SEMP.
TPMs (see Section 5.7.2.8) are a tool used for project
control, and the extent to which TPMs will be employed
should be defined in the SEMP (Roedler and Jones,
2006).
A SEMP should be prepared early in the project, sub­
mitted to the customer (or to management for in‐house
projects), and used in technical management for the con­
cept and development stages of the project or the equiva­
lent in commercial practice. The creation of the SEMP
involves defining the SE processes, functional analysis
approaches, what trade studies will be included in the
project, schedule, and organizational roles and responsi­
bilities, to name a few of the more important aspects of
the plan. The SEMP also reports the results of the effort
undertaken to form a project team and outlines the major
deliverables of the project, including a decision data­
base, specifications, and baselines. Participants in the
creation of the SEMP should include senior systems
engineers, representative subject matter experts, project
management, and often the customer.
The format of the SEMP can be tailored to fit project,
customer, or company standards. To maximize reuse of
the SEMP for multiple projects, project‐specific appen­
dices are often used to capture detailed and dynamic
information, such as the decision database, a schedule of
milestones and decision gate reviews, and the method­
ology to be used in resolving problems uncovered in
reviews.
The process inputs portion of the SEMP identifies the
applicable source documents (e.g., customer specifica­
tions from the RFP, SOW, standards, etc.) to be used
in the performance of the project and in developing asso­
ciated deliverables (e.g., the system specification and
technical requirements document). It also may include
previously developed specifications for similar systems

107

and company procedures affecting performance specifi­
cations. A technical objectives document should be devel­
oped and may be one of the source documents for the
decision database. The document may also be part of
the ConOps for the system (see Section 4.2.2.4).
The SEMP should include information about the
project organization, technical management, and technical
activities. A complete outline of a SEMP is available in
ISO/IEC/IEEE 24748‐4 (2014), which is aligned with
ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288 and this handbook. As a high‐level
overview, the SEMP should include the following:
•• Organization of the project and how SE interfaces
with the other parts of the organization
•• Responsibilities and authority of the key positions
•• Clear system boundaries and scope of the project
•• Project assumptions and constraints
•• Key technical objectives
•• Infrastructure support and resource management
(i.e., facilities, tools, IT, personnel, etc.)
•• Approach and methods used for planning and exe­
cuting the technical processes described in this
handbook (see Chapter 4)
•• Approach and methods used for planning and
executing the technical management processes
described in this handbook (see Chapter 5)
•• Approach and methods used for planning and exe­
cuting the applicable specialty engineering processes
described in this handbook (see Chapter 10)
The SEMP may sometimes address affordability/
cost‐effectiveness/life cycle cost (LCC) analysis (see
Section 10.1) and value engineering (see Section 10.14)
practices to provide insight into system/cost‐effective­
ness. For example, can the project be engineered to have
significantly more value with minimal additional cost?
If so, does the customer have the resources for even the
modest cost increase for the improvement? Can the solu­
tions be achieved within their budgets and schedules?
This assures the customer that obvious cost‐effective
alternatives have been considered (ISO/IEC/IEEE
24748‐4, 2014).
Technical reviews are essential to ensure that the
system will meet the requirements and that the require­
ments are understood by the development team. Formal
reviews are essential to determine readiness to proceed

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

108

Technical Management Processes

to the next stage of the system life cycle. The number
and frequency of these reviews and their associated
decision gates must be tailored for specific projects. The
SEMP should list what technical reviews will be con­
ducted and the methodology to be used in solving
problems uncovered during those reviews.
The system life cycles shown in Figure 3.3 illustrate
the appropriate time for reviews and decision gates. They
may not fit all projects, and some projects may need
more or fewer reviews. Additionally, formal, docu­
mented decision gates, with the customer in attendance,
can impose significant cost on the project. Projects
should plan to use more frequent, informal, in‐house
reviews to resolve most issues and strive to exit decision
gates with no major customer‐imposed action items.
Transitioning critical technologies should be done as
a part of risk management (see Section 5.4) but is called
out separately here for special emphasis. Critical tech­
nologies should be identified, and the steps outlined
for risk management should be followed. Additionally,
completed and planned risk management work should
be explicitly referenced in the SEMP.
The system being proposed may be complex enough
that the customer will require training to use it. During
the project, it may be necessary to train those who will
develop, manufacture, verify, deploy, operate, support,
conduct training, or dispose of the system. A plan for this
training is required in the SEMP and should include the
following:
1. Analysis of performance
2. Behavior deficiencies or shortfalls
3. Required training to remedy deficiencies or
shortfalls
4. Schedules to achieve required proficiencies
Verification is usually planned using a verification
matrix that lists all the requirements and anticipated ver­
ification methods. The possible methods of verification
include inspection, analysis, demonstration, and test.
The SEMP should state, at least in preliminary general
terms, that a verification plan will be written to define
the items to be verified and which methods will be used
to verify performance. The plan should also define who
is to perform and witness the verification of each item.
This should also relate to the SEMS for time phasing of
the verification process. Detailed procedures are usually

not written for inspection, analysis, and demonstration
methods. Simulations may be used for testing, when
quantifiable results are needed, or for demonstration,
when qualitative results are satisfactory.
A well‐written SEMP provides guidance to a project
and helps the organization avoid unnecessary discus­
sions about how to perform SE. In addition, a schedule
and organization are defined that help the project procure
the personnel needed throughout the development life
cycle and assess progress.
5.2 Project Assessment and Control
Process
5.2.1
5.2.1.1

Overview
Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,

[6.3.2.1] The purpose of the Project Assessment and
Control process is to assess if the plans are aligned and
feasible; determine the status of the project, technical
and process performance; and direct execution to ensure
that the performance is according to plans and sched­
ules, within projected budgets, to satisfy technical
objectives.

Assessments are scheduled periodically and for all
milestones and decision gates. The intention is to main­
tain good communications within the project team and
with the stakeholders, especially when deviations are
encountered.
The process uses these assessments to direct the efforts
of the project, including redirecting the project when the
project does not reflect the anticipated maturity.
5.2.1.2 Description The project planning process
(see Section 5.1) identified details of the work effort and
expected results. The project assessment and control pro­
cess collects data to evaluate the adequacy of the project
infrastructure, the availability of necessary resources,
and the compliance with project performance measures.
Assessments also monitor the technical progress of the
project and may identify new risks or areas that require
additional investigation. A discussion of the creation and
assessment of TPMs is found in Section 5.7.2.8.
The rigor of the project assessment and control
process is directly dependent on the complexity of
the system of interest (SOI). Project control involves

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Project Assessment and Control Process

109

Controls

Inputs
• WBS
• Project budget
• Project schedule
• Procedures
• Reports
• Configuration baselines
• Information repository
• Measurement repository
• QM corrective actions
• Quality assurance evaluation
report
• Validated requirements

Activities

Outputs

• Plan for project
Assessment and control
• Assess the project
• Control the project

• Project assessment and
control strategy
• Project performance
measures needs
• Project performance
measures data
• Project status report
• Project control requests
• Project change requests
• Project lessons learned
• Project assessment and
control record

Enablers
Figure 5.2 IPO diagram for the project assessment and control process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and
Walden. Usage per the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

both corrective and preventive actions taken to ensure that
the project is performing according to plans and sched­
ules and within projected budgets. The project assessment
and control process may trigger activities within the other
process areas in this chapter. Figure 5.2 is the IPO dia­
gram for the project assessment and control process.
5.2.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
project assessment and control process are listed in
Figure 5.2. Descriptions of each input and output are
provided in Appendix E.
5.2.1.4 Process Activities The project assessment
and control process includes the following activities:
•• Plan for project assessment and control.
–– Develop a strategy for project assessment and
control for the system.
•• Assess the project.
–– Review measurement results associated with the
project.

–– Determine actual and projected cost against
budget, actual and projected time against
schedule, and deviations in project quality.
–– Evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of the
performance of project activities.
–– Evaluate the adequacy and the availability of the
project infrastructure and resources.
–– Evaluate project progress against established
criteria and milestones.
–– Conduct required reviews, audits, and inspections
to determine readiness to proceed to the next
milestone.
–– Monitor critical tasks and new technologies (see
Section 5.4).
–– Analyze assessment results.
–– Make recommendations for adjustments to
project plans—these are input to the project
control process and other decision‐making
processes.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

110

Technical Management Processes

–– Communicate status as designated in agreements,
policies, and procedures.
•• Control the project.
–– Initiate preventive actions when assessments
indicate a trend toward deviation.
–– Initiate problem resolution when assessments
indicate nonconformance with performance
success criteria.
–– Initiate corrective actions when assessments indi­
cate deviation from approved plans.
–– Establish work items and changes to schedule to
reflect the actions taken.
–– Negotiate with suppliers for any goods or services
acquired from outside the organization.
–– Make the decision to proceed, or not to proceed,
when assessments support a decision gate or
milestone event.
Common approaches and tips:
•• One way for project management to remain
updated on project status is to conduct regular
team meetings. Short stand‐up meetings on a daily
or weekly schedule are effective for smaller
groups.
•• Prevailing wisdom suggests that “what gets mea­
sured gets done,” but projects should avoid the
collection of measures that are not used in decision
making.
•• The Project Management Institute provides industry‐
wide guidelines for project assessment, including
Earned Value Management techniques.
•• Project teams need to identify critical areas and
control them through monitoring, risk management,
or configuration management.
•• An effective feedback control process is an essential
element to enable the improvement of project
performance.
•• Agile project management techniques schedule
frequent assessments and make project control
adjustments on tighter feedback cycles than other
plan‐driven development models.
•• Tailoring of organization processes and procedures
(see Chapter 8) should not jeopardize any certifica­
tions. Processes must be established with effective
review, assessment, audit, and upgrade.

5.3

Decision Management Process

5.3.1 Overview
5.3.1.1 Purpose As defined by ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,
[6.3.3.1] The purpose of the Decision Management
process is to provide a structured, analytical framework
for objectively identifying, characterizing and evalu­
ating a set of alternatives for a decision at any point in
the life cycle and select the most beneficial course of
action.

Table 5.1 provides a partial list of decision situa­
tions (opportunities) that are commonly encountered
throughout a system’s life cycle. Buede (2009) provides
a much larger list.
Consider the number of decisions involved in crafting
a technology development strategy, generating an initial
capability document, selecting a system architecture,
con­verging on a detailed design, constructing test and
evaluation plans, making production make‐or‐buy
decisions, creating production ramp‐up plans, crafting
maintenance plans, and defining disposal approaches.
New product developments entail an array of interrelated
decisions that require the holistic perspective of the SE
discipline. In fact, it can be argued that all SE activities

Table 5.1 Partial list of decision situations
(opportunities) throughout the life cycle
Life cycle stage

Decision situation (opportunity)

Concept

Assess technology opportunity/initial
business case
Craft a technology development strategy
Inform, generate, and refine an initial
capability document
Inform, generate, and refine a capability
development document
Conduct analysis of alternatives
supporting program initiation decision
Select system architecture
Select system element
Select lower‐level elements
Select test and evaluation methods
Perform make‐or‐buy decision
Select production process and location
Select maintenance approach
Select disposal approach

Development

Production
Utilization, support
Retirement

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Decision Management Process

should be conducted within the context of supporting
good decision making. If an SE activity cannot point to
at least one of the many decisions embedded in a system
life cycle, one must wonder why the activity is being
conducted at all. Positioning decision management as a
critical SE activity will ensure the efforts are rightfully
interpreted as relevant and meaningful and thus maxi­
mize the discipline’s value proposition to new product
developers and their leadership.
5.3.1.2 Description A formal decision management
process is the transformation of a broadly stated decision
situation into a recommended course of action and asso­
ciated implementation plan. The process can be executed
by a resourced decision team that consists of a decision
maker with full responsibility, authority, and account­
ability for the decision at hand, a decision analyst with
a suite of reasoning tools, subject matter experts with
performance models, and a representative set of end
users and other stakeholders (Parnell et al., 2013). The
decision process is executed within the policy and
guidelines established by the sponsoring agent. The
decision process realizes this transformation through a
structured process. It must be recognized that this pro­
cess, as with most any SE process, contains subjective
elements, and two equally qualified teams can come
to different conclusions and recommendations. A well‐
structured trade study process, however, will be able
to capture and communicate the impact that different
value judgments have on the overall decision and even
facilitate the search for alternatives that remain attractive

111

across a wide range of value schemes. Figure 5.3 is the
IPO diagram for the decision management process.
5.3.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
decision management process are listed in Figure 5.3.
Descriptions of each input and output are provided in
Appendix E.
5.3.1.4 Process Activities The decision management
process includes the following activities:
•• Prepare for decisions.
–– Define the decision management strategy for the
system.
–– Establish and challenge the decision statement,
and clarify the decision to be made. This is one
of the most important steps since an incomplete
or incorrect decision statement will inappropri­
ately constrain the options considered or even
lead the team down the wrong path. Consider the
differences that would result from the following
decision statements:
°° What car should I buy?
°° What vehicle should I buy?
°° What vehicle should I acquire (buy or lease)?
°° Do I need to travel?
•• Analyze the decision information.
–– Frame, tailor, and structure decision.
–– Develop objectives and measures.

Controls

Inputs
• Decision situation

Activities
• Prepare for decisions
• Analyze the decision
information
• Make and manage
decisions

Outputs
• Decision management
strategy
• Decision report
• Decision record

Enablers
Figure 5.3 IPO diagram for the decision management process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and Walden.
Usage per the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

112

Technical Management Processes

–– Generate creative alternatives.
–– Assess alternatives via deterministic analysis.
–– Synthesize results.
–– Identify uncertainty and conduct probabilistic
analysis, as appropriate.
–– Assess impact of uncertainty.
–– Improve alternatives.
–– Communicate trade‐offs.
–– Present recommendation and implementation
plan.
•• Make and manage decisions.
–– Record the decision, with the relevant data and
supporting documentation.
–– Communicate new directions from the decision.
5.3.2

Elaboration

Systems engineers will likely face many types of decision
situations throughout the life cycle of a project. Systems
engineers must choose the analytical approach that best
fits the frame and structure of the decision problem at
hand. For instance, when there are “… clear, important,
and discrete events that stand between the implementa­
tion of the alternatives and the eventual consequences…”
(Edwards et al., 2007), a decision tree is often a well‐
suited analytical approach, especially when the decision
structure has only a few decision nodes and chance
nodes. As the number of decision nodes and chance
nodes grows, the decision tree quickly becomes unwieldy
and loses some of its communicative power. Furthermore,
decision trees require end node consequences be expressed
in terms of a single number. This is commonly accom­
plished for decision situations where the value proposi­
tion of alternatives can be readily monetized and end
state consequences can be expressed in dollars, euros,
yen, etc. When the value proposition of alternatives
within a decision problem cannot be easily monetized,
an objective function can often be formulated to syn­
thesize an alternative’s response across multiple, often
competing, objectives. This type of problem requires
the use of a multiple objective decision analysis (MODA)
approach.
The decision management method most commonly
employed by systems engineers is the trade study and
more often than not employs some form of MODA
approach. The aim is to define, measure, and assess

shareholder and stakeholder value and then synthesize this
information to facilitate the decision maker’s search for an
alternative that represents the optimally balanced response
to often competing objectives. MODA approaches gener­
ally differ in the degree to which an alternative’s response
to objectives (and subobjectives) is aggregated, the math­
ematics used to aggregate such responses, the techniques
used to elicit value statements from stakeholders, the
treatment of uncertainty, the robustness of sensitivity anal­
ysis, the use of screening techniques, and the versatility
and quality of trade space visualization outputs. If time
and funding allow, systems engineers may want to con­
duct trade studies using several techniques, compare and
contrast results, and reconcile any differences to ensure
findings are robust. Although there are many possible
ways to specifically implement MODA, the discussion
contained in the balance of this section represents a short
summary of best practices regardless of the specific imple­
mentation technique employed.
5.3.2.1 Framing and Tailoring Decisions To help
ensure the decision makers and stakeholders fully under­
stand the decision context and to enhance the overall
traceability of the decision, the decision analyst should
capture a description of the system baseline as well as a
notion for how the envisioned system will be used along
with some indication of system boundaries and antici­
pated interfaces. Decision context includes such details
as the time frame allotted for the decisions, an explicit
list of decision makers and stakeholders, a discussion
regarding available resources, and expectations regarding
the type of action to be taken as a result of the decision
at hand as well as decisions anticipated in the future
(Edwards et al., 2007).
5.3.2.2 Developing Objectives and Measures
Defining how a decision will be made may seem like
a straightforward assignment but often becomes an
arduous task of seeking clarity amidst a large number
of ambiguous stakeholder need statements, engaging in
uncomfortable discussions regarding the relative priority
of each requirement, and establishing walkaway points
and stretch goals. As Keeney puts it,
Most important decisions involve multiple objectives,
and usually with multiple‐objective decisions, you can’t
have it all. You will have to accept less achievement in
terms of some objectives in order to achieve more on

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Decision Management Process

other objectives. But how much less would you accept to
achieve how much more? (Keeney, 2002)

The first step is to use the information obtained from
the stakeholder requirements definition process, require­
ments analysis process, and requirements management
processes to develop objectives and measures.
For each fundamental objective, a measure must be
established so that alternatives that more fully satisfy the
objective receive a better score on the measure than those
alternatives that satisfy the objective to a lesser degree.
A measure (also known as attribute, criterion, and metric)
must be unambiguous, comprehensive, direct, operational,
and understandable (Keeney and Gregory, 2005).
5.3.2.3 Generating Creative Alternatives For many trade
studies, the alternatives will be systems composed of many
interrelated system elements. It is important to establish a
meaningful product structure for the SOI and to apply this
product structure consistently throughout the decision anal­
ysis effort in order to aid effectiveness and efficiency of com­
munications about alternatives. The product structure should
be a useful decomposition of the physical elements of the
SOI. Each alternative is composed of specific design choices
for each physical element. The ability to quickly communi­
cate the differentiating design features of given alternatives is
a core element of the decision‐making exercise.
5.3.2.4 Assessing Alternatives via Deterministic
Analysis With objectives and measures established and
alternatives identified and defined, the decision team
should engage subject matter experts, ideally equipped
with operational data, test data, models, simulation, and
expert knowledge. The decision team can best prepare
for subject matter expert engagement by creating struc­
tured scoring sheets. Assessments of each concept against
each criterion are best captured on separate structured
scoring sheets for each alternative/objective combination.
Each score sheet contains a summary description of the
alternative under examination and a summary of the scor­
ing criteria to which it is being measured.
5.3.2.5 Synthesizing Results At this point in the pro­
cess, the decision team has generated a large amount of
data as summarized in the objective measure consequence
table created as the final task of the process step. Now, it
is time to explore the data, make sense of the data, and
display results in a way that facilitates understanding.

113

5.3.2.6 Identifying Uncertainty and Conducting
Probabilistic Analysis As part of the assessment, it
is important for the subject matter expert to explicitly
discuss potential uncertainty surrounding the assessed
score and variables that could impact one or more
scores. One source of uncertainty that is common within
SE trade‐off analysis exploring various system archi­
tectures is that system concepts are generally described
as a collection of system element design choices but
lack discussion of the component‐level design decisions
that are normally made downstream during detailed
design. Many times, the subject matter expert can assess
an upper, nominal, and lower bound measure response
by making three separate assessments (i) assuming a
low performance, (ii) assuming moderate performance,
and (iii) assuming high performance. Once all scores
and their associated uncertainty are appropriately cap­
tured, Monte Carlo simulations can be executed to
identify uncertainty that impacts the decision findings
and identify areas of uncertainty that are inconsequen­
tial to decision findings.
5.3.2.7 Accessing Impact of Uncertainty: Analyzing
Risk and Sensitivity Decision analysis uses many forms
of sensitivity analysis including line diagrams, tornado
diagrams, waterfall diagrams, and several uncertainty
analyses including Monte Carlo simulation, decision
trees, and influence diagrams (Parnell et al., 2013).
5.3.2.8 Improving Alternatives One could be tempted
to end the decision analysis here, highlight the alternative
that has the highest total value, and claim success. Such a
premature ending however would not be considered best
practice. Mining the data generated for the first set of
alternatives will likely reveal opportunities to modify
some system element design choices to claim untapped
value and reduce risk.
5.3.2.9 Communicating Trade‐Offs This is the point
in the process where the decision team identifies key
observations regarding what stakeholders seem to want
and what they must be willing to give up in order to
achieve it. It is here where the decision team can high­
light the design decisions that are least significant and/or
most influential and provide the best stakeholder value.
In addition, the important uncertainties and risks should
also be identified. Observations regarding combinatorial
effects of various design decisions are also important

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

114

Technical Management Processes

products of this process step. Finally, competing objec­
tives that are driving the trade should be explicitly
highlighted as well.
5.3.2.10 Presenting Recommendations and Imple­
menting Action Plan It is often helpful to describe the
recommendation in the form of clearly worded, action­
able task list to increase the likelihood of the decision
analysis leading to some form of action, thus delivering
some tangible value to the sponsor. Reports are impor­
tant for historical traceability and future decisions. Take
the time and effort to create a comprehensive, high‐
quality report detailing study findings and supporting
rationale. Consider static paper reports augmented with
dynamic hyperlinked electronic reports.
5.4

Risk Management Process

5.4.1
5.4.1.1

Overview
Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,

[6.3.4.1] The purpose of the Risk Management process
is to identify, analyze, treat and monitor the risks
continually.

5.4.1.2 Description Numerous standards, guidelines,
and informational publications address the subjects of
risk and risk management. In some cases, the application
of specific standards may be mandated by industry regu­
lations or customer contractual agreement.
Because there is significant variation, and even con­
tradiction, in the risk and risk management concepts and
practices presented in these publications, it is important
that process owners, implementers, and users of risk
management processes ensure that their understanding
of, and approach to, risk management is sufficient, con­
sistent, and appropriate for their specific context, scope,
and objectives.
Definitions of Risk According to E. H. Conrow,
“Traditionally, risk has been defined as the likelihood of
an event occurring coupled with a negative consequence
of the event occurring. In other words, a risk is a potential
problem—something to be avoided if possible, or its
likelihood and/or consequences reduced if not” (2003).
Below are several definitions consistent with this
traditional concept of risk:

•• ISO/IEC/IEEE 16085:2006, Systems and software
engineering—Life
cycle
processes—Risk
management, defines risk as the “combination of
the probability of an event and its consequence,”
with the following three notes:
–– The term risk is generally used only when there is
at least the possibility of negative consequences.
–– In some situations, risk arises from the possi­
bility of deviation from the expected outcome
or event.
–– See ISO/IEC Guide 51 (1999) for issues related
to safety.
Comments: (i) This ISO/IEC/IEEE 16085 definition
is taken from ISO Guide 73: 2002, definition 3.1.1
(since replaced with the revised definition in ISO
Guide 73:2009). (ii) This is the definition referenced
in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288.
As a corollary to risk, Conrow defines opportunity as
“the potential for the realization of wanted, positive
­consequences of an event” (Conrow, 2003). The idea of
considering opportunities and positive outcomes (in
addition to negative outcomes) as an integral part of a
risk management process has gained favor with some
experts and practitioners. New risk and risk management
concepts intended to support this broadened scope for
risk management are evolving. Notable definitions of
risk that reflect this broaden scope are:
•• ISO Guide 73:2009, Risk management—Vocabulary,
defines risk as the “effect of uncertainty on objec­
tives” with the following five notes:
–– An effect is a deviation from the expected—
positive and/or negative.
–– Objectives can have different aspects (such as
financial, health and safety, and environmental
goals) and can apply at different levels (such as
strategic, organization‐wide, project, product, and
process).
–– Risk is often characterized by reference to poten­
tial events and consequences or a combination of
these.
–– Risk is often expressed in terms of a combina­
tion of the consequences of an event (including
changes in circumstances) and the associated
likelihood of occurrence.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Risk Management Process

–– Uncertainty is the state, even partial, of defi­
ciency of information related to, understanding
or knowledge of, an event, its consequence, or
likelihood.
According to the Practice Standard for Project Risk
Management (PMI, 2009), when assessing the impor­
tance of a project risk, consider the two key dimensions
of risk: uncertainty and the effect on the project’s objec­
tives. The uncertainty dimension may be described using
the term “probability,” and the effect dimension may be
called “impact” (though other descriptors are possible,
such as “likelihood” and “consequence”).
Risk includes both distinct events, which are uncer­
tain but can be clearly described, and general conditions,
which are less specific but may give rise to uncertainty.
The two types of project risk, those with negative and
those with positive effects, are called, respectively,
“threats” and “opportunities.”
Process Enablers It has been found that an organi­
zation’s structure and culture can have a significant
effect on the performance of the risk management
process. ISO 31000, Risk management—Principles and
guidelines (2009), outlines a model that advocates the
establishment of principles for managing risk and a
framework for managing risk that work in concert with
the process for managing risk.
Risk Management Process Risk management is a
disciplined approach to dealing with the uncertainty
that is present throughout the entire system life cycle. A
primary objective of risk management is to identify and
manage (take proactive steps) to handle the uncertainties
that threaten or reduce the value provided by a business
enterprise or organization. Since risk cannot be reduced
to zero, another objective is to achieve a proper balance
between risk and opportunity.
This process is used to understand and avoid the
potential cost, schedule, and performance (i.e., technical)
risks to a system and to take a proactive and structured
approach to anticipate negative outcomes and respond
to them before they occur. Organizations manage many
forms of risk, and the risk associated with system devel­
opment is managed in a manner that is consistent with
the organization strategy.
Every new system or modification of an existing
system is based on the pursuit of an opportunity. Risk is

115

always present in the life cycle of systems, and the risk
management actions are assessed in terms of the oppor­
tunity being pursued.
External risks are often neglected in project man­
agement. External risks are risks caused by or origi­
nating from the surrounding environment of the project
(Fossnes, 2005). Project participants often have no con­
trol or influence over external risk factors, but they can
learn to observe the external environment and eventually
take proactive steps to minimize the impact of external
risks on the project. The typical issues are time‐dependent
processes, rigid sequence of activities, one dominant
path for success, and little slack.
Typical strategies for coping with risk include trans­
ference, avoidance, acceptance, or taking action to
reduce the anticipated negative effects of the situation.
Most risk management processes include a prioritiza­
tion scheme whereby risks with the greatest negative
effect and the highest likelihood are treated before
those deemed to have lower negative consequences and
lower likelihood. The objective of risk management is
to balance the allocation of resources such that the
minimum amount of resources achieves the greatest
risk mitigation (or opportunity realization) benefits.
Figure 5.4 is the IPO diagram for the risk management
process.
5.4.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
risk management process are listed in Figure 5.4.
Descriptions of each input and output are provided in
Appendix E.
5.4.1.4 Process Activities The risk management
process includes the following activities:
•• Plan risk management.
–– Define and document the risk strategy.
•• Manage the risk profile.
–– Establish and maintain a risk profile to include
context of the risk and its probability, conse­
quences, risk thresholds, and priority and the risk
action requests along with the status of their
treatment.
–– Define and document risk thresholds and accept­
able and unacceptable risk conditions.
–– Periodically communicate the risks with the
appropriate stakeholders.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

116

Technical Management Processes

Controls

Inputs
• Candidate risks and
opportunities

Activities

Outputs

• Plan risk management
• Manage the risk profile
• Analyze risks
• Treat risks
• Monitor risks

• Risk management strategy
• Risk report
• Risk record

Enablers
Figure 5.4 IPO diagram for the risk management process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and Walden. Usage
per the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

•• Analyze risks.
–– Define risk situations and identify the risks.
–– Analyze risks for likelihood and consequence
to determine the magnitude of the risk and its
priority for treatment.
–– Define a treatment scheme and resources for each
risk, including identification of a person who will
be responsible for continuous assessment of the
status of the situation.
•• Treat risks.
–– Using the criteria for acceptable and unacceptable
risk, consider the risk treatment alternative, and
generate a plan of action when the risk threshold
exceeds acceptable levels.
•• Monitor risks.
–– Maintain a record of risk items and how they
were treated.
–– Maintain
transparent
risk
management
communications.
Common approaches and tips:
•• In the project planning process (see Section 5.1),
a risk management plan (RMP) is tailored to sat­
isfy the individual project procedures for risk
management.
•• A risk management process establishes documenta­
tion, maintained as the risk profile, that includes a
description, priority, treatment, responsible person,
and status of each risk item.

•• One rule of thumb for identifying risks is to pose
each risk candidate in an “if <situation>, then
<consequence>, for <stakeholder >” format. This
form helps to determine the validity of a risk and
assess its magnitude or importance. If the statement
does not make sense or cannot be put in this format,
then the candidate is probably not a valid risk. For
example, a statement that describes a situation but
not a consequence impacting a specific stakeholder
implies that the potential event will not affect
the project. Similarly, a statement of potential con­
sequence to a stakeholder without a clear situation
or event chain scenario description is probably not
adequately understood and requires more analysis.
•• All personnel are responsible for using the procedure
to identify risks.
•• Risks can be identified based on prior experience,
brainstorming, lessons learned from similar pro­
grams, and checklists.
•• Risk identification activity should be applied early
and continuously throughout the life cycle of the
project.
•• Document everything so if unforeseen issues and
challenges arise during execution, the project can
recreate the environment within which the planning
decisions were made and know where to update the
information to correct the problem.
•• Negative feedback toward personnel who identify a
potential problem will discourage the full cooperation
of engaged stakeholders and could result in failure to

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Risk Management Process

5.4.2

Elaboration

5.4.2.1 Risk Management Concepts Most projects
are executed in an environment of uncertainty. Risks
(also called threats) are events that if they occur can
influence the ability of the project team to achieve project
objectives and jeopardize the successful completion of
the project (Wideman, 2002). Well‐established tech­
niques exist for managing threats, but there is some
debate over whether the same techniques are applicable
to recognizing opportunities. In an optimal situation,
opportunities are maximized at the same time as threats
are minimized, resulting in the best chance to meet
project objectives (PMI, 2000). The Øresund Bridge case
(see Section 3.6.2) illustrates this in that the man‐made
Peberholm Island was created from the materials dredged
from the Strait to meet environmental requirements and
is now a sanctuary for a rare species of tern.
The measurement of risk has two components (see
Figure 5.5):
•• The likelihood that an event will occur
•• The undesirable consequence of the event if it does
occur

High
High risk

Consequence

address serious risk‐laden situations. Conduct a trans­
parent risk management process to encourage sup­
pliers and other stakeholders to assist in risk mitigation
efforts. Some situations can be difficult to categorize
in terms of probability and consequences; involve all
relevant stakeholders in this evaluation to capture the
maximum variety in viewpoints.
•• Many analyses completed throughout the technical
processes, such as FMECA, may identify candidate
risk elements.
•• The measures for risk management vary by organi­
zation and by project. As with any measure, use
measurement analysis or statistics that help manage
the risk.
•• Experience has shown that terms such as “positive
risk” and concept models that define opportunity as a
subset of risks serve only to confuse. Projects that are
subject to regulatory standards or customer require­
ments regarding risk management process and output
must use extreme care when integrating opportunity
management with risk management. The Project
Management Institute is a good source for more
information for project risk management (PMI, 2013).

117

Medium risk

Low risk
Low
Low

Likelihood

High

Figure 5.5 Level of risk depends upon both likelihood and
consequences. INCOSE SEH v1 Figures 4.5 and 4.6. Usage
per the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

The likelihood that an undesirable event will occur is
often expressed as a probability. The consequence of the
event is expressed in terms that depend on the nature of
the event (e.g., lost investment, inadequate performance,
etc.). The combination of low likelihood and low unde­
sirable consequences gives low risk, while high risk is
produced by high likelihood and highly undesirable
consequences.
By changing the adjective from undesirable to desir­
able, the noun changes from risk to opportunity, but the
diagram remains the same. As suggested by the shading,
most projects experience a comparatively small number
of high‐risk or high‐opportunity events.
There is no alternative to the presence of risk in
system development. The only way to remove risk is to
set technical goals very low, to stretch the schedule, and
to supply unlimited funds. None of these events happen
in the real world, and no realistic project can be planned
without risk. The challenge is to define the system and
the project that best meet overall requirements, allow for
risk, and achieve the highest chances of project success.
Figure 5.6 illustrates the major interactions between
the four risk categories: technical, cost, schedule, and
programmatic. The arrow labels indicate typical risk
relationships, though others certainly are possible.
•• Technical risk—The possibility that a technical
requirement of the system may not be achieved in

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

118

Technical Management Processes

s
roble
ms
Im
p
bu osed
dg
ets

i cal p

und
ited
f

Tech
n

es

s

Programmatic
risk

dul

blem

pro

Lim

Mission
changes

e
sch

al
hnic
Tec

Cost risk

sed
res

mp

Co

Technical
risk

D
sc em
he an
du d
les

Schedule
Risk

Schedule slips
Figure 5.6 Typical relationship among the risk categories. INCOSE SEH v1 Figures 4.5, 4.6, and 4.7. Usage per the INCOSE
Notices page. All other rights reserved.

the system life cycle. Technical risk exists if the
system may fail to achieve performance require­
ments; to meet operability, producibility, testability,
or integration requirements; or to meet environmental
protection requirements. A potential failure to meet
any requirement that can be expressed in technical
terms is a source of technical risk.
•• Cost risk—The possibility that available budget
will be exceeded. Cost risk exists if the project must
devote more resources than planned to achieve
technical requirements, if the project must add
resources to support slipped schedules due to any
reason, if changes must be made to the number of
items to be produced, or if changes occur in the
organization or national economy. Cost risk can be
predicted at the total project level or for a system
element. The collective effects of element‐level cost
risks can produce cost risk for the total project.
•• Schedule risk—The possibility that the project will
fail to meet scheduled milestones. Schedule risk
exists if there is inadequate allowance for acquisition
delays. Schedule risk exists if difficulty is experi­
enced in achieving scheduled technical accom­
plishments, such as the development of software.
Schedule risk can be incurred at the total project
level for milestones such as deployment of the first
system element. The cascading effects of element‐
level schedule risks can produce schedule risk for
the total project.

•• Programmatic risk—Produced by events that are
beyond the control of the project manager. These
events are often produced by decisions made by per­
sonnel at higher levels of authority, such as reductions
in project priority, delays in receiving authorization to
proceed with a project, reduced or delayed funding,
changes in organizational or national objectives, etc.
Programmatic risk can be a source of risk in any of the
other three risk categories.
5.4.2.2 Risk Management Approach Once a risk
management strategy and risk profile have been
established, the three key risk management process
activities are analyze risks, treat risks, and monitor risks.
Analyze Risks Analyzing risks involves identifying risks
and evaluating their relative likelihood and consequence.
The basis for this evaluation may be qualitative or
quantitative; regardless, the objective is to set priorities
and focus attention on areas of risk with the greatest
consequences to the success of the project. All stakeholders
and project personnel should feel welcome to contribute
to identifying and analyzing risks.
If a project is unprecedented, brainstorming using
strength–weakness–opportunity–threat (SWOT) or Delphi
techniques may be appropriate. However, most projects
represent a new combination of existing systems or system
elements or represent the insertion of incremental advances
in technology. This means that key insights can be gained

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Risk Management Process

concerning a current project’s risk by examining the
successes, failures, problems, and solutions of similar
prior projects. The experience and knowledge gained, or
lessons learned, can be applied to identify potential risk in
a new project and to develop risk‐specific management
strategies.
The first step is to determine the information needs.
This could vary from assessing the risk in development
of a custom computer chip to identifying the risks asso­
ciated with a major system development. Next, systems
engineers define the basic characteristics of the new
system as a basis for identifying past projects that are
similar in technology, function, design, etc. Based on
the availability of data, analogous systems or system ele­
ments are selected and data gathered. Often, the data col­
lection process and initial assessment lead to a further
definition of the system for the purposes of comparison.
Comparisons to prior systems may not be exact or the
data may need to be adjusted to be used as a basis for
estimating the future. The desired output is insight into
cost, schedule, and technical risks of a project based on
observations of similar past projects.
Uncertainty is characterized by a distribution of out­
comes based on the likelihood of occurrence and severity
of consequences. As noted previously, risk involves both
the likelihood and consequences of the possible out­
comes. In its most general form, risk analysis should
capture the spectrum of outcomes relative to the desired
project technical performance, cost, and schedule require­
ments. Risk generally needs to be analyzed subjectively
because adequate statistical data are rarely available.
Expert interviews and models are common techniques for
conducting risk analysis.
Risk Perception It is important to recognize that the
severity of consequences (or impact) associated with a
risk is an attribute of the person or group potentially
affected by the risk, rather than an attribute of the “risk
event” per se. In other words, the occurrence of a risk
event will have different effects on different people
depending on (i) their specific situation and perspective
at the time of the occurrence and (ii) their unique personal
values, perceptions, and sensitivities. It is possible, for
example, for one person (or group) to be negatively
impacted by an event or situation, while another person
(or group) is positively impacted by the same event or
situation. This is to be expected in win–lose and
competitive event scenarios. Likewise, when two or more

119

people (or groups) are affected in a uniformly negative
or positive manner, at least some variation in their
assessment of the level of negative or positive impact can
be expected. In general, a risk event having significant
variation in effect for different individuals or groups
should be separated into an appropriate number of
uniquely identified individual risk statements and detailed
further to include reference to the effected person or
group and the specific effects that are unique to them.
To achieve accuracy of risk estimation and overall
effectiveness of the risk management effort, it is very
important that risk estimates are based on clear, unam­
biguous risk descriptions and an adequate understanding
of the values and situations of those potentially affected
by the occurrence of the risk event. When possible,
direct communication with the affected individuals and
groups is preferred. Variation in perceived risk levels can
often be reduced through clarification of risk event sce­
narios and better definition of risk assessment criteria
and rating scales.
ISO Guide 73:2009, Risk management—Vocabulary,
defines risk perception as a “stakeholder’s view on a risk”
noting that “risk perception reflects the stakeholder’s
needs, issues, knowledge, belief and values.” A stake­
holder is defined as a “person or organization that can
affect, be affected by, or perceive themselves to be
affected by a decision or activity.”
Generally, the stakeholders consulted with to define
system needs, expectations, and requirements (see
Section 4.2) should also be consulted with to identify
and assess risks. It is good practice to establish and main­
tain traceability between stakeholders and risks, as well
as stakeholders and requirements. Risk statements and
estimates that do not reference the stakeholder(s) affected
by the risk event or situation should be viewed as vague
and incomplete or at least potentially inaccurate.
Expert Interviews Efficient acquisition of expert
judgments is extremely important to the overall accuracy
of the risk management effort. The expert interview
technique consists of identifying the appropriate experts,
questioning them about the risks in their area of expertise,
and quantifying these subjective judgments. One result is
the formulation of a range of uncertainty or a probability
density (with respect to cost, schedule, or performance)
for use in any of several risk analysis tools.
Since expert interviews result in a collection of
subjective judgments, the only real “error” can be in the

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

120

Technical Management Processes

methodology for collecting the data. If it can be shown
that the techniques for collecting the data are not ade­
quate, then the entire risk assessment can become ques­
tionable. For this reason, the methodology used to collect
the data must be thoroughly documented and defensible.
Experience and skill are required to encourage the expert
to divulge information in the right format. Typical prob­
lems encountered include identification of the wrong
expert, obtaining poor quality information, unwilling­
ness of the expert to share information, changing opin­
ions, getting biased viewpoints, obtaining only one
perspective, and conflicting judgments. When conducted
properly, expert interviews provide reliable qualitative
information. However, the transformation of that
qualitative information into quantitative distributions or
other measures depends on the skill of the analyst.
Risk Assessment Techniques ISO 31010, Risk
management—Risk assessment techniques (2009),
provides detailed descriptions and application guidance
for approximately 30 assessment techniques ranging from
brainstorming and checklists to Failure Mode and Effects
Analysis (FMEA), fault tree analysis (FTA), Monte Carlo
simulation, and Bayesian statistics and Bayes nets.
Treat Risks Risk treatment approaches (also referred
to as risk handling approaches) need to be established
for the moderate and high‐risk items identified in the
risk analysis effort. These activities are formalized in the
RMP. There are four basic approaches to treat risk:
1. Avoid the risk through change of requirements or
redesign.
2. Accept the risk and do no more.
3. Control the risk by expending budget and other
resources to reduce likelihood and/or consequence.
4. Transfer the risk by agreement with another party
that it is in their scope to mitigate. Look for a partner
that has experience in the dedicated risk area.
The following steps can be taken to avoid or control
unnecessary risks:
•• Requirements scrubbing—Requirements that sig­
nificantly complicate the system can be scrutinized
to ensure that they deliver value equivalent to their
investment. Find alternative solutions that deliver
the same or comparable capability.

•• Selection of most promising options—In most situ­
ations, several options are available. A trade study
can include project risk as a criterion when select­
ing the most promising alternative.
•• Staffing and team building—Projects accomplish
work through people. Attention to training, team­
work, and employee morale can help avoid risks
introduced by human errors.
For high‐risk technical tasks, risk avoidance is insuffi­
cient and can be supplemented by the following approaches:
•• Early procurement
•• Initiation of parallel developments
•• Implementation of extensive analysis and testing
•• Contingency planning
The high‐risk technical tasks generally imply high
schedule and cost risks. Cost and schedule are impacted
adversely if technical difficulties arise and the tasks are
not achieved as planned. Schedule risk is controlled by
early procurement of long‐lead items and provisions for
parallel‐path developments. However, these activities
also result in increased early costs. Testing and analysis
can provide useful data in support of key decision
points. Finally, contingency planning involves weigh­
ing alternative risk mitigation options.
For each risk that is determined credible after analysis,
a Risk Treatment Plan (also referred to as a Risk Mitigation
Action Plan) should be created that identifies the risk
treatment strategy, the trigger points for action, and any
other information to ensuring the treatment is effectively
executed. The Risk Treatment Plan can be part of the risk
record on the risk profile. For risks that have significant
consequences, a contingency plan should be created in
case the risk treatment is not successful. It should include
the triggers for enacting a contingency plan.
In China, the authorities built the short maglev train
line in Shanghai (see Section 3.6.3) as a proof of con­
cept. In spite of the high investment, this represented
lower risk to the project than attempting a longer line
with an unproven technology. The results collected
from this project are inspiring others to consider maglev
alternatives for greater distances.
Monitor Risks Project management uses measures to
simplify and illuminate the risk management process.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Risk Management Process

Each risk category has certain indicators that may be
used to monitor project status for signs of risk. Tracking
the progress of key system technical parameters can be
used as an indicator of technical risk.
The typical format in tracking technical performance
is a graph of a planned value of a key parameter plotted
against calendar time. A second contour showing the
actual value achieved is included in the same graph for
comparative purposes. Cost and schedule risk are moni­
tored using the products of the cost/schedule control
system or some equivalent technique. Normally, cost and
schedule variances are used along with a comparison of
tasks planned to tasks accomplished. A number of addi­
tional references exist on the topic of risk management
(AT&T, 1993; Barton et al., 2002; Michel and Galai,
2001; Shaw and Lake, 1993; Wideman, 2004).
Risk management process scope, context, and objec­
tives The risk management process described in this
section is generic and may be applied at any stage of the
SE life cycle (see Section 3.3), at any level in a system
hierarchy (see Section 2.3), or to an SoS (see Section 2.4).
In addition, an organization may decide to include
opportunity management (i.e., risk and opportunity
management) or management of positive consequences
(in addition to negative consequences) as part of one or
more risk management processes. As a foundation for
efficiency and effectiveness, the scope and context of the
risk management process should be clearly defined and
consistent with requirements and expectations for the
process.
Defining the System and Its Boundaries ISO 31000, Risk
management—Principles and guidelines on implementation
(2009), provides guidance and rationale for establishing
the external and internal context of a risk management
process.
System models (see Section 9.1) describing the
system to which the risk management process applies
(whether enterprise, product, or service) can facilitate
the risk management process by providing about what
the system “is” and “does,” how it behaves in different
scenarios, the location of its boundaries, and the defini­
tion of internal and external interfaces. System models
can greatly enhance communication and can help ensure
the comprehensiveness needed for full risk identification.
The scope of a risk management process also includes
a time dimension. It is rare that a single risk management

121

process is used throughout the lifetime of a system for
all risks in all life cycle stages. For example, a product
development organization might utilize a project risk
management process during the development stage, while
separate risk management processes performed by differ­
ent organizations may be used years later for the utiliza­
tion and support stages. By defining the calendar time and
life cycle stage scopes of each risk management process,
the likelihood of gaps and overlap is reduced.
Risk Management and the System Life Cycle Once the
scope and context of a system have been established
from a hierarchical standpoint, it is possible to define
and model the system (and its associated risks) in relation
to its life cycle. Risks at the early stages of the life cycle
(exploratory research and concept definition) are quite
different than the risks at the final stage (retirement). It
is often necessary to consider risks in other stages while
performing activities in the current stage. For example,
risks associated with the retirement stage (e.g., human
exposure to hazard waste during disposal) should be
considered as part of risk management performed to
evaluate concept options for disposability.
The performance and output of risk management
activities related to safety risks encountered during
the development, production, utilization, support, and
retirement stages may be governed by regulations
and standards (e.g., ISO 14971, Medical devices—
Application of risk management to medical devices)
or by customer contractual agreement. As necessary,
specialty engineering activities such as safety anal­
ysis (see Section 10.10), usability analysis/human
systems integration (Section 10.13), and system secu­
rity engineering (see Section 10.11) should be uti­
lized and coordinated through a risk management
process that complies with regulatory and/or customer
requirements.
5.4.2.3 Opportunity Management Concepts SE and
project management are all about pursuing an opportu­
nity to solve a problem or fulfill a need. Opportunities
enable creativity in resolving concepts, architectures,
designs, and strategic and tactical approaches, as well as
the many administrative issues within the project. It is
the selection and pursuit of these strategic and tactical
opportunities that determine just how successful the
project and system will be. Of course, opportunities usu­
ally carry risks, and each opportunity will have its own

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

122

Technical Management Processes

set of risks that must be intelligently judged and properly
managed to achieve the full value (Forsberg et al., 2005).
Opportunities represent the potential for improving
the value of the project results. The project champions
(e.g., the creators, designers, integrators, and implemen­
ters) apply their “best‐in‐class” practices in the pursuit of
opportunities. After all, the fun of working on projects is
doing something new and innovative. It is these opportu­
nities that create the project’s value. Risks are defined as
chances of injury, damage, or loss. Risks are the chances
of not achieving the results as planned. Each of the stra­
tegic and tactical opportunities pursued has associated
risks that undermine and detract from the opportunity’s
value. These are the risks that must be managed to
enhance the opportunity value and the overall value of
the project (see Figure 5.7). Opportunity management
and risk management are, therefore, essential to—and
performed concurrently with—the planning process but
require the application of separate and unique techniques
that justify this distinct technical management element.
There are two levels of opportunities and risks.
Because a project is the pursuit of an opportunity, the
macro level is the project opportunity itself. The approach
to achieving the macro opportunity and the mitigation of
associated project‐level risks are structured into the
strategy and tactics of the project cycle, the selected
decision gates, the teaming arrangements, key personnel
selected, and so on. The element level encompasses the
tactical opportunities and risks within the project that
become apparent at lower levels of decomposition and as
project life cycle stages are planned and executed. This

Net expected value
–10

–5

0

+5

+10

can include emerging, unproven technology; incremental
and evolutionary methods that promise high returns; and
the temptation to circumvent proven practices to deliver
products better, faster, and cheaper.
Overall project value can be expressed as benefit
divided by cost. Opportunities and their risks should be
managed jointly to enhance project value. This is based
on the relative merits of exploiting each opportunity and
mitigating each risk. In the context of the opportunity
and the resultant value, we carry a spare tire to mitigate
the risk of a flat tire by reducing the probability and
impact of having a delayed trip. The high value we place
on getting where we want to go far exceeds the small
expense of a spare. When deciding to pursue the oppor­
tunity of a long automobile trip, we may take extra risk
management precautions, such as preventive mainte­
nance and spares for hard‐to‐find parts.
The assessment of opportunity and risk balance is sit­
uational. For example, few today have a car with more
than one spare tire (multiple spares were common prac­
tice in the early 1900s). However, a few years ago, an
individual decided to spend a full month driving across
the Australian Outback in late spring. He was looking for
solitude in the wilderness (his opportunity). On advice
from experienced friends, he took four spare tires and
wheels. They also advised him that the risk of mechanical
breakdown was very high on a 30‐day trip, and the
consequence would almost certainly be fatal. The risk of
two vehicles breaking down at the same time was accept­
ably low. So, he adjusted the opportunity for absolute
solitude by joining two other adventurers. They set out in
three cars. Everyone survived in good health, but only
two cars returned, and two of his “spare” tires were
shredded by the rough terrain. The “balanced” mitigation
approach proved effective.
5.5 Configuration Management
Process
5.5.1
5.5.1.1

Expected value
of risks

Expected value
of opportunities

Figure 5.7 Intelligent management of risks and opportu­
nities. Derived from (Forsberg et al., 2005) page 224. Reprinted
with permission from Kevin Forsberg. All other rights reserved.

Overview
Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,

[6.3.5.1] The purpose of the Configuration Management
process is to manage and control system elements and
configurations over the life cycle. CM also manages
consistency between a product and its associated
­configuration definition.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Configuration Management Process

This is accomplished by ensuring the effective
management of the evolving configuration of a system,
both hardware and software, during its life cycle.
Fundamental to this objective is the establishment, con­
trol, and maintenance of software and hardware baselines.
Baselines are business, budget, functional, performance,
and physical reference points for maintaining develop­
ment and control. These baselines, or reference points, are
established by review and acceptance of requirements,
design, and product specification documents. The creation
of a baseline may coincide with a project milestone or
decision gate. As the system matures and moves through
the life cycle stages, the software or hardware baseline is
maintained under configuration control.

123

documentation are known. Figure 5.8 is the IPO dia­
gram for the configuration management process.
5.5.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
configuration management process are listed in Figure 5.8.
Descriptions of each input and output are provided in
Appendix E.
5.5.1.4 Process Activities The configuration manage­
ment process includes the following activities:

5.5.1.2 Description Evolving the concept definition
and system definition is a reality that must be addressed
over the life of a system development effort and
through­out the utilization and support stages of the
system. Configuration management ensures that prod­
uct functional, performance, and physical characteris­
tics are properly identified, documented, validated, and
verified to establish product integrity; that changes
to these product characteristics are properly identified,
reviewed, approved, documented, and implemented;
and that the products produced against a given set of

•• Plan configuration management.
–– Create a configuration management strategy.
–– Implement a configuration control cycle that
incorporates evaluation, approval, validation,
and verification of engineering change requests
(ECRs).
•• Perform configuration identification.
–– Identify system elements and information items
to be maintained under configuration control as
configuration items (CIs).
–– Establish unique identifiers for the CIs.
–– Establish baselines for the CIs at appropriate
points through the life cycle, including agreement
of the baselines by the acquirer and supplier.

Controls

Inputs

Activities

Outputs

• Candidate configuration
items
• Project change requests

• Plan configuration
management
• Perform configuration
identification
• Perform configuration
change management
• Perform configuration
status accounting
• Perform configuration
evaluation
• Perform release control

• Configuration management
strategy
• Configuration baselines
• Configuration management
report
• Configuration management
record

Enablers
Figure 5.8 IPO diagram for the configuration management process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and
Walden. Usage per the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

124

Technical Management Processes

•• Perform configuration change management.
–– Control baseline changes throughout the sys­
tem life cycle. This includes the identification,
record­
ing, review, approval, tracking, and
processing of requests for change (RFCs) and
requests for variance (RFVs) (also known as
deviations).
•• Perform configuration status accounting.
–– Develop and maintain configuration control doc­
umentation and configuration management data,
and communicate the status of controlled items
to the project team.
•• Perform configuration evaluation.
–– Perform configuration audits and configuration
management surveillance reviews associated with
milestones and decision gates to validate the
baselines.
•• Perform release control.
–– Perform prioritization, tracking, scheduling, and
closing changes, including relevant supporting
documentation.
Common approaches and tips:
•• In the project planning process (see Section 5.1), a
configuration management plan (CMP) is tailored
to satisfy the individual project procedures for
configuration management.
•• The primary output of the configuration manage­
ment process is the maintenance of the configura­
tion baseline for the system and system elements
wherein items are placed under formal control as
part of the decision‐making process.
•• Establish a Configuration Control Board (CCB)
with representation from all relevant stakeholders
and engineering disciplines participating on the
project.
•• Begin the configuration management process in the
infancy stages of the system and continue through
until disposal of the system.
•• Configuration management documentation is main­
tained throughout the life of the system.
•• Additional guidance regarding configuration
management activities can be found in ISO 10007
(2003), IEEE Std 828 (2012), and ANSI/EIA 649B
(2011).

•• Domain‐specific practices, such as SAE Aerospace
Recommended Practice (ARP) 4754A, Guidelines
for Development of Civil Aircraft and Systems
(2010), provide additional application detail for the
domain.
5.5.2 Elaboration
5.5.2.1 Configuration Management Concepts The
purpose of configuration management is to establish
and maintain the control of requirements, documenta­
tion, and artifacts produced throughout the system’s life
cycle and to manage the impact of change on a project.
Baselines consolidate the evolving configuration states
of system elements to form documented baselines at
designated times or under defined circumstances.
Baselines form the basis for the next change. Selected
baselines typically become formalized between acquirer
and supplier, depending on the practices of the industry
and the contractual involvement of the acquirer in the
configuration change process. There are generally three
major types of baselines at the system level: functional
baseline, allocated baseline, and product baseline. These
may vary by domain or local strategy (ISO/IEC/IEEE
15288:2015).
Change is inevitable, as indicated in Figure 5.9.
Systems engineers ensure that the change is necessary
and that the most cost‐effective recommendation has
been proposed.
Initial planning efforts for configuration manage­
ment are performed at the onset of the project and
defined in the CMP, which establishes the scope of items
that are covered by the plan; identifies the resources and
personnel skill level required; defines the tasks to be
performed; describes organizational roles and responsi­
bilities; and identifies configuration management tools
and processes, as well as methodologies, standards, and
procedures that will be used on the project. Configuration
control maintains integrity by facilitating approved
changes and preventing the incorporation of unapproved
changes into the items under configuration control. Such
activities as check‐in and checkout of source code,
versions of system elements, and deviations of manu­
factured items are part of configuration management.
Independent configuration audits assess the evolution
of a product to ensure compliance to specifications,
policies, and contractual agreements. Formal audits
may be performed in support of decision gate review.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Configuration Management Process

125

New requirements
Changed requirements

Original
requests

Required
for
final
delivery

Original requirements

Deleted requirements
Changes in the environment
Figure 5.9 Requirements changes are inevitable. Derived from (Forsberg et al., 2005) Figure 9.3. Reprinted with permission
from Kevin Forsberg. All other rights reserved.

A request to change the current configuration of a
system is typically made using an Engineering Change
Proposal (ECP). An ECP may originate in a number of
ways. The customer may request an ECP to address a
change in requirements or a change in scope; an unex­
pected breakthrough in technology may result in the sup­
plier of a system element proposing an ECP; or a supplier
may identify a need for changes in the system under
development. Circumstances like these that will potentially
change the scope or the requirements are appropriate rea­
sons to propose an ECP and to conduct an analysis to
understand the effect of the change on existing plans, costs,
and schedules. The ECP must be approved before the
change is put into effect. It is never appropriate to propose
an ECP to correct cost or schedule variances absent
of change in scope. A minor change that falls within the
current project scope usually does not require an ECP but
should be approved and result in the generation of an engi­
neering notice (EN). It is also important to ask, “What is the
impact of not making the change?” especially as the system
matures, since changes made later in the life cycle have an
increasing risk of hidden impacts, which can adversely
affect system cost, schedule, and technical performance.
The most desirable outcomes of an ECP cycle are:
1. System functionality is altered to meet a changing
requirement.

2. New technology or a new product extends the
capabilities of the system beyond those initially
required in ways that the customer desires.
3. The costs of development, or of utilization, or of
support are reduced.
4. The reliability and availability of the system are
improved.
Outcomes three and four reduce LCC and potentially
save more money than is invested to fund the proposed
change.
ECPs and ENs help ensure that a system evolves in
ways that allow it to continue to satisfy its operational
requirements and its objectives and that any modification
is known to all relevant personnel. The airplane system
illustrated in Figure 2.2 is an example of a product family
that depends on accurate identification of system ele­
ments and characteristics to support the mix and match
consumer market.
5.5.2.2 Configuration
Management
Approach
Configuration management establishes and maintains
control over requirements, specifications, configuration
definition documentation, and design changes.
Configuration identification, configuration control, con­
figuration status accounting, and configuration audits of
the functional and physical configuration (i.e., validation

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

126

Technical Management Processes

and distribution) are the primary focus of configuration
management.
There will always be a need to make changes; how­
ever, SE must ensure (i) that the change is necessary and
(ii) that the most cost‐effective solution has been pro­
posed. Configuration management must, therefore, apply
technical and administrative direction, surveillance, and
services to do the following:
•• Identify and document the functional and physical
characteristics of individual CIs such that they are
unique and accessible in some form.
•• Assign a unique identifier to each version of
each CI.
•• Establish controls to allow changes in those
characteristics.
•• Concur in product release and ensure consistent
products via the creation of baseline products.
•• Record, track, and report change processing and
implementation status and collect measures pertain­
ing to change requests or problems with the product
baseline.
•• Maintain comprehensive traceability of all
transactions.
Configuration Identification Configuration identifica­
tion uniquely identifies the elements within a baseline
configuration. This unique identification promotes the
ability to create and maintain master inventory lists
of baselines. As part of the SE effort, the system is
decomposed into CIs, which serve as the critical elements
subjected to rigorous formal control. The compilation of
all the CIs is called the CI list. This list may reflect items
that are developed, vendor produced, or provided by the
customer for integration into the final system. These
items may be deliverable items under the contract or
used to produce the deliverable items.
Change Management Configuration change manage­
ment, or change control, manages the collection of the
items to be baselined and maintains the integrity of the
CIs identified by facilitating approved changes (e.g., via
ECRs) and preventing the incorporation of unapproved
changes into the baseline. Change control should be in
effect beginning at project initiation.
Change Classification Effective configuration control
requires that the extent of analysis and approval action

for a proposed engineering change be in concert with the
nature of the change. The problem statement includes
a description of the proposed change, the reason for the
proposed change, the impacts of the change on cost
and schedule, and all affected documentation. Change
classification is a primary basis of configuration control.
All changes to baselined items are classified as outside
of the scope of the requirements or within the scope of
the requirements. A change outside the scope of project
requirements is a change to a project baseline item that
affects the form, fit, specification, function, reliability,
or safety. The coordinating review board determines if
this proposed change requires a change notice for review
and approval.
Changes are sometimes categorized into two main
classes: Class I and Class II. A Class I change is a major
or significant change that affects cost, schedule, or
technical performance. Normally, Class I changes require
customer approval prior to being implemented. A Class
II change is a minor change that often affects documen­
tation errors or internal design details. Generally, Class II
changes do not require customer approval.
CCB An overall CCB is implemented at project
initiation to provide a central point to coordinate, review,
evaluate, and approve all proposed changes to baselined
documentation and configurations, including hardware,
software, and firmware. The review board is composed
of members from the various disciplines, including SE,
software and hardware engineering, project manage­
ment, product assurance, and configuration management.
The chairperson is delegated the necessary authority
to act on behalf of the project manager in all matters
falling within the review board responsibilities. The
configuration management organization is delegated
responsibility for maintaining status of all proposed
changes. Satellite or subordinate boards may be estab­
lished for reviewing software or hardware proposed
changes below the CI level. If those changes require a
higher approval review, they are forwarded to the overall
review board for adjudication.
Changes that fall within review board jurisdiction
should be evaluated for technical necessity, compliance
with project requirements, compatibility with associated
documents, and project impact. As changes are written
while the hardware and/or software products are in var­
ious stages of manufacture or verification, the review
board should require specific instructions for identifying

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Configuration Management Process

the effectivity or impact of the proposed software or
hardware change and disposition of the in‐process or
completed hardware and/or software product. The types
of impacts the review board should assess typically
include the following:
•• All parts, materials, and processes are specifically
approved for use on the project.
•• The design depicted can be fabricated using the
methods indicated.
•• Project quality and reliability assurance require­
ments are met.
•• The design is consistent with interfacing designs.
Methods and Techniques Change control forms provide
a standard method of reporting problems and enhance­
ments that lead to changes in formal baselines and
internally controlled items. The following forms provide
an organized approach to changing hardware, software,
or documentation:
•• Problem/change reports—Can be used for docu­
menting problems and recommending enhance­
ments to hardware/software or its complementary
documentation. These forms can be used to identify
problems during design, development, integration,
verification, and validation.
•• Specification change notice (SCN)—Used to pro­
pose, transmit, and record changes to baselined
specifications.
•• ECPs—Used to propose Class I changes to the cus­
tomer. These proposals describe the advantages of
the proposed change and available alternatives and
identify funding needed to proceed.
•• ECRs—Used to propose Class II changes.
•• Request for deviation/waiver—Used to request
and document temporary deviations from configu­
ration identification requirements when permanent
changes to provide conformity to an established
baseline are not acceptable.
Configuration Status Accounting Status accounting
provides the data on the status of controlled products
needed to make decisions regarding system elements
throughout the product life cycle. Configuration manage­
ment maintains a status of approved documentation that

127

identifies and defines the functional and physical cha­
racteristics, status of proposed changes, and status of
approved changes. This subprocess synthesizes the output
of the identification and control subprocesses. All changes
authorized by the configuration review boards (both
overall and subordinate) culminate in a comprehensive
traceability of all transactions. Such activities as check‐in
and checkout of source code, builds of CIs, deviations of
manufactured items, and waiver status are part of the
status tracking. By statusing and tracking project
changes, a gradual change from the build‐to to the as‐
built configuration is captured. Suggested measures
for consideration include the following:
•• Number of changes processed, adopted, rejected,
and open
•• Status of open change requests
•• Classification of change requests summary
•• Number of deviations or waivers by CI
•• Number of problem reports open, closed, and
in‐process
•• Complexity of problem reports and root cause
•• Labor associated with problem resolution and veri­
fication stage when problem was identified
•• Processing times and effort for deviations, waivers,
ECPs, SCNs, ECRs, and problem reports
•• Activities causing a significant number of change
requests and rate of baseline changes
Configuration Evaluations Configuration evaluations,
or audits, are performed independently by configuration
management and product assurance to evaluate the
evolution of a product and ensure compliance to
specifications, policies, and contractual agreements.
Formal audits, or functional and physical configuration
audits, are performed at the completion of a product
development cycle.
The functional configuration audit is intended to vali­
date that the development of a CI has been completed and
has achieved the performance and functional characteris­
tics specified in the system specification (functional base­
line). The physical configuration audit is a technical
review of the CI to verify the as‐built maps to the technical
documentation (physical baseline). Finally, configuration
management performs periodic in‐process audits to ensure
that the configuration management process is followed.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

128

5.6

Technical Management Processes

Information Management Process

Information management plans, executes, and controls
the provision of information to designated stakeholders
that is unambiguous, complete, verifiable, consistent,
modifiable, traceable, and presentable. Information
includes technical, project, organizational, agreement, and
user information. Information is often derived from data
records of the organization, system, process, or project.

drawings, memos, email, computer files, and
databases.
•• Information security generally refers to the confiden­
tiality, integrity, and availability of the information
assets (ISO 17799, 2005).
•• Information security management includes the con­
trols used to achieve information security and is
accomplished by implementing a suitable set of
controls, which could be policies, practices, proce­
dures, organizational structures, and software.
•• Information Security Management System is the
life cycle approach to implementing, maintaining,
and improving the interrelated set of policies, con­
trols, and procedures that ensure the security of an
organization’s information assets in a manner
appropriate for its strategic objectives.

Information management needs to provide relevant,
timely, complete, valid, and, if required, confidential
information to designed parties during and, as appro­
priate, after the system life cycle. It manages designed
information, including technical, project, organizational,
agreement, and user information.
Information management ensures that information
is properly stored, maintained, secured, and accessible
to those who need it, thereby establishing/maintaining
integrity of relevant system life cycle artifacts.

Information management provides the basis for the
management of and access to information throughout the
system life cycle, including after disposal if required.
Designated information may include organizational,
project, agreement, technical, and user information. The
mechanisms for maintaining historical knowledge in the
prior processes—decision making, risk, and configura­
tion management—are under the responsibility of
information management. Figure 5.10 is the IPO dia­
gram for the information management process.

5.6.1
5.6.1.1

Overview
Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,

[6.3.6.1] The purpose of the Information Management
process is to generate, obtain, confirm, transform, retain,
retrieve, disseminate and dispose of information, to
designated stakeholders.

5.6.1.2 Description Information exists in many forms,
and different types of information have different values
within an organization. Information assets, whether tan­
gible or intangible, have become so pervasive in contem­
porary organizations that they are indispensable. The
impact of threats to secure access, confidentiality, integ­
rity, and availability of information can cripple the ability
to get work done. As information systems become increas­
ingly interconnected, the opportunities for compromise
increase (Brykczynski and Small, 2003). The following
are important terms in information management:
•• Information is what an organization has compiled
or its employees know. It can be stored and commu­
nicated, and it might include customer information,
proprietary information, and/or protected (e.g., by
copyright, trademark, or patent) and unprotected
(e.g., business intelligence) intellectual property.
•• Information assets are intangible information and
any tangible form of its representation, including

5.6.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
information management process are listed in Figure 5.10.
Descriptions of each input and output are provided in
Appendix E.
5.6.1.4 Process Activities The information manage­
ment process includes the following activities:
•• Prepare for information management.
–– Support establishing and maintaining a system
data dictionary—see project planning outputs.
–– Define system‐relevant information, storage
requirements, access privileges, and the duration
of maintenance.
–– Define formats and media for capture, retention,
transmission, and retrieval of information.
–– Identify valid sources of information and desig­
nate authorities and responsibilities regarding
the origination, generation, capture, archival,

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Information Management Process

129

Controls

Inputs

Activities

Outputs

• Candidate information
items
• Project change requests

• Prepare for information
management
• Perform information
management

• Information management
strategy
• Information repository
• Information management
report
• Information management
record

Enablers
Figure 5.10 IPO diagram for the information management process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and
Walden. Usage per the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

and disposal of information in accordance with
the configuration management process.
•• Perform information management.
–– Periodically obtain or transform artifacts of
information.
–– Maintain information according to integrity,
security, and privacy requirements.
–– Retrieve and distribute information in an appro­
priate form to designated parties, as required by
agreed schedules or defined circumstances.
–– Archive designated information for compliance
with legal, audit, knowledge retention, and project
closure requirements.
–– Dispose of unwanted, invalid, or unverifiable
information according to organizational policy,
security, and privacy requirements.
Common approaches and tips:
•• In the project planning process (see Section 5.1), an
information management plan is tailored to satisfy
the individual project procedures for information
management. An information management plan
identifies the system‐relevant information to be
collected, retained, secured, and disseminated, with
a schedule for disposal.

•• Identify information‐rich artifacts and store them
for later use even if the information is informal,
such as a design engineer’s notebook.
•• Information management delivers value to the
organization and the project by using a variety
of mechanisms to provide access to the contents
of data repositories. Email, web‐based access
through intranets, and database queries are a few
examples.
•• ISO 17799, Code of Practice for Information
Security Management, is an international standard
that provides a best practice framework for imple­
menting security controls.
•• ISO 10303, Automation Systems and Integration—
Product Data Representation and Exchange—
informally referred to as “Standard for the Exchange
of Product Model Data” (STEP). It includes
Application Protocol (AP) 239, Product Life Cycle
Support (PLCS), which addresses information
requirements for complex systems.
5.6.2

Elaboration

5.6.2.1 Information Management Concepts The
purpose of information management is to maintain
an archive of information produced throughout the

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

130

Technical Management Processes

system’s life cycle. The initial planning efforts
for information management are defined in the
information management plan, which establishes the
scope of project information that is maintained; iden­
tifies the resources and personnel skill level required;
defines the tasks to be performed; defines the rights,
obligations, and commitments of parties for genera­
tion, management, and access; and identifies infor­
mation management tools and processes, as well as
methodologies, standards, and procedures that will
be used on the project. Typical information includes
source documents from stakeholders, contracts,
project planning documents, verification documen­
tation, engineering analysis reports, and the files
maintained by configuration management. Today,
information manage­ment is increasingly concerned
with the integration of information via databases,
such as the decision database, and the ability to
access the results from decision gate reviews and
other decisions taken on the project; requirements
management tools and databases; computer‐based
training and electronic interactive user manuals;
websites; and shared information spaces over the
Internet, such as INCOSE Connect. The STEP—ISO
10303 standard provides a neutral computer‐inter­
pretable representation of product data throughout
the life cycle. ISO 10303‐239 (AP 239), PLCS, is an
international standard that specifies an information
model that defines what information can be
exchanged and represented to support a product
through life (PLCS, 2013). INCOSE is a cosponsor
of ISO 10303‐233, Application Protocol: Systems
Engineering (2012). AP 233 is used to exchange data
between a SysML™ and other SE application and
then to applications in the larger life cycle of systems
potentially using related ISO STEP data exchange
capabilities.
With effective information management, information
is readily accessible to authorized project and organiza­
tion personnel. Challenges related to maintaining data­
bases, security of data, sharing data across multiple
platforms and organizations, and transitioning when
technology is updated are all handled by information
management. With all the emphasis on knowledge
management, organizational learning, and information
as competitive advantage, these activities are gaining
increased attention.

5.7

Measurement Process

5.7.1
5.7.1.1

Overview
Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,

[6.3.7.1] The purpose of the Measurement process is
to collect, analyze, and report objective data and infor­
mation to support effective management and demon­
strate the quality of the products, services, and processes.

5.7.1.2 Description The SE measurement process
will help define the types of information needed to
support program management decisions and implement
SE best practices to improve performance. The key SE
measurement objective is to measure the SE process and
work products with respect to program/project and
organization needs, including timeliness, meeting
performance requirements and quality attributes, prod­
uct conformance to standards, effective use of resources,
and continuous process improvement in reducing cost
and cycle time.
The Practical Software and Systems Measurement
Guide (DoD and US Army, 2003), Section 1.1, states:
Measurement provides objective information to help the
project manager:
•• Communicate effectively throughout the project
organization
•• Identify and correct problems early
•• Make key trade‐offs
•• Track specific project objectives
•• Defend and justify decisions
Specific measures are based on information needs
and how that information will be used to make decisions
and take action. Measurement thus exists as part of a
larger management process and includes not just the
project manager but also systems engineers, analysts,
designers, developers, integrators, logisticians, etc. The
decisions to be made motivate the kinds of information
to be generated and, therefore, the measurements to be
made.
Another concept of successful measurement is the
communication of meaningful information to the
decision makers. It is important that the people who use

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Measurement Process

131

Controls

Inputs
• Measurement needs
• Measurement data

Activities

Outputs

• Prepare for measurement
• Perform measurement

• Measurement strategy
• Measurement repository
• Measurement report
• Measurement record

Enablers
Figure 5.11 IPO diagram for the measurement process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and Walden. Usage
per the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

the measurement information understand what is being
measured and how it is to be interpreted. Figure 5.11 is
the IPO diagram for the measurement process.
5.7.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
measurement process are listed in Figure 5.11. Descriptions
of each input and output are provided in Appendix E.
5.7.1.4 Process Activities The measurement process
includes the following activities:
•• Prepare for measurement.
–– Identify the measurement stakeholders and their
measurement needs, and develop a strategy to
meet them.
–– Identify and select relevant prioritized measures
that aid with the management and technical
performance of the program.
–– Define the base measures, derived measures, indi­
cators, data collection, measurement frequency,
measurement repository, reporting method and
frequency, trigger points or thresholds, and review
authority.
•• Perform measurement.
–– Gather, process, store, verify, and analyze the data to
obtain measurement results (information products).
–– Document and review the measurement
information products with the measurement
stakeholders and recommend action, as war­
ranted by the results.

Further detail of the measurement process and activ­
ities can be found in the INCOSE Systems Engineering
Measurement Primer, a useful guide for those new to
measures as well as for experienced practitioners.
Common approaches and tips:
•• Collection of measures for collection sake is a
waste of time and effort.
•• Each measure collected should be regularly reviewed
by the measurement stakeholders. At a minimum,
key measures should be reviewed monthly and
weekly for the more mature organizations.
•• Some contracts identify measures of effectiveness
(MOEs) that must be met. The derived measures of
performance (MOPs) and TPMs that provide the
necessary insight into meeting the MOEs are
automatic measures to be included within the
measurement plan. Other measures to consider should
provide insight into technical and programmatic exe­
cution of the program (Roedler and Jones, 2006).
•• The best measures require minimal effort to collect
and are repeatable, straightforward to understand,
and presented in a format on a regular (weekly or
monthly) basis with trend data.
•• Many methods are available to present the data to
the measurement stakeholders. Line graphs and con­
trol charts are two of the more frequently used. Tools
are available to help with measurement.
•• If a need for corrective action is perceived, further
investigation into the measures may be necessary to

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

132

Technical Management Processes

identify the root cause of the issue to ensure that
corrective actions address the cause instead of a
symptom.
•• Measurement by itself does not control or improve
process performance. Measurement results must be
provided to decision makers in a manner that provides
the needed insight for the right decisions to be made.
5.7.2

Elaboration

5.7.2.1 Measurement Concepts Measurement con­
cepts have been expanded upon in the previous works
that the SE measurement practitioner should reference
for further insights:
•• INCOSE Systems Engineering Measurement
Primer, v2.0 (INCOSE, 2010b)
•• Technical Measurement Guide, Version 1.0
(INCOSE and PSM, 2005)
•• Systems Engineering Leading Indicators Guide,
Version 2.0 (LAI, INCOSE, PSM, and SEARI,
2010)
•• ISO/IEC/IEEE 15939, Systems and Software
Engineering—Measurement Process (2007)
•• PSM Guide V4.0c, Practical Software and Systems
Measurement (DoD and US Army, 2003)
•• CMMI®
(Measurement
and
Quantitative
Management Process Areas), Version 1.3 (Software
Engineering Institute, 2010)
•• Practical Software Measurement: Objective Infor­
mation for Decision Makers (McGarry et al., 2001)

•• System Development Performance Measurement
Report (NDIA, 2011)
•• SEBoK Part 3: SE and Management/Systems
Engineering Management/Measurement (SEBoK,
2014)
5.7.2.2 Measurement Approach As discussed in the
Systems Engineering Measurement Primer referenced
earlier, measurement may be thought of as a feedback
control system. The graphic below shows that measure­
ments may be taken at three primary points in the system.
However, the value in measurement comes not from the
act of measurement but rather from the eventual analysis
of the data and the implementation of action to either
correct a variance from a target value or to improve
current performance to a more desirable level. The
decision as to when to act comes from comparison of the
actual measured value against a target value for that
measure. The target value and the allowable difference
between the target and actual before action is taken are
based upon evaluation of risk to the project or product
performance meeting their required goals.
Figure 5.12 further indicates that there might be
advantage to separating the planning of the measurement
process into measures related to the development pro­
cess (staffing, requirements approved, etc.) and mea­
sures related to the product performance (product weight,
product speed, etc.). The advantage in this separation
would be the recognition that the stakeholders and data
collectors for process‐related measures will likely be a
different population than stakeholders and data collec­
tors for product‐related measures.

Systems engineering

Resources

Work products

Process

Resource
measure

Process
measure
Action

Analysis

Product
measure

Measurement

Figure 5.12 Measurement as a feedback control system. From INCOSE‐TP‐2010‐005‐02 Figure 2.1. Usage per the INCOSE
Notices page. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Measurement Process

5.7.2.3 Process‐Oriented Measures A reasonable
approach in organizing process‐oriented measures is to
categorize them based upon the organizational goal sup­
ported. Organizational goals may be broken into the fol­
lowing categories:
•• Cost (development)
•• Schedule (development)
•• Quality (process)
The specific measures selected under each goal would
be those necessary to track process activities thought to
produce the greatest risk to meeting the goals of the
product or organization.
5.7.2.4 Leading Indicators An important subgroup
of process‐related measures is leading indicators. A
leading indicator is a measure for evaluating the effec­
tiveness of how a specific activity is applied on a
program in a manner that provides information about
impacts that are likely to affect the system performance
or SE effectiveness objectives.
A leading indicator may be an individual measure,
or collection of measures, that is predictive of future
system performance before the performance is real­
ized. Leading indicators aid leadership in delivering
value to customers and end users while assisting in
taking interventions and actions to avoid rework and
wasted effort.
Leading indicators differ from conventional SE
measures in that conventional measures provide status
and historical information, while leading indicators
use an approach that draws on trend information to
allow for predictive analysis (forward looking). By
analyzing the trends, predictions can be forecast on the
outcomes of certain activities. Trends are analyzed for
insight into both the entity being measured and poten­
tial impacts to other entities. This provides leaders
with the data they need to make informed decisions
and, where necessary, take preventive or corrective
action during the program in a proactive manner. While
the leading indicators appear similar to existing mea­
sures and often use the same base information, the
difference lies in how the information is gathered,
evaluated, interpreted, and used to provide a forward‐
looking perspective. Examples of leading indicator
measures include the following:

133

•• Requirements trends—Rate of maturity of the
system definition against the plan. Requirements
trends characterize the stability and completeness
of the system requirements that could potentially
impact design and production.
•• Interface trends—Interface specification closure
against plan. Lack of timely closure could pose
adverse impact to system architecture, design,
implementation, and/or verification and validation
(V&V), any of which could pose technical, cost,
and schedule impact.
•• Requirements validation trends—Progress against
the plan in ensuring that the customer requirements
are valid and properly understood. Adverse trends
would pose impacts to system design activity with
corresponding impacts to technical, cost, and
schedule baselines and customer satisfaction.
For a more detailed treatment of this topic, including
measurement examples, please consult the Systems
Engineering Leading Indicators Guide (Roedler et al.,
2010).
5.7.2.5 Product‐Oriented Measures As shown in
referenced document Technical Measurement (Roedler
and Jones, 2006), product measures can be thought of as
an interdependent hierarchy (see Figure 5.13).
5.7.2.6 MOEs and MOPs MOEs and MOPs are
two concepts that represent types of measures typically
collected. MOEs are defined in the INCOSE‐
TP‐2003‐020‐01, Technical Measurement Guide
(Roedler and Jones, 2006), as follows:
The “operational” measures of success that are closely
related to the achievement of the mission or operational
objective being evaluated, in the intended operational
environment under a specified set of conditions; i.e.,
how well the solution achieves the intended purpose.
(Adapted from DoD 5000.2, DAU, and INCOSE)

MOPs are defined as follows:
The measures that characterize physical or functional
attributes relating to the system operation, measured or
estimated under specified testing and/or operational envi­
ronment conditions. (Adapted from DoD 5000.2, DAU,
INCOSE, and EPI 280‐04, LM Integrated Measurement
Guidebook)

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

134

Technical Management Processes

Increasing
technical
resolution
and periodic
insight

Measures of
Effectiveness
(MOEs)

Mission needs
or critical
operating issues

Key Performance
Parameters
(KPPs)

Technical
insight
(progress
and risk)

Measures
of
Performance
Technical
Performance
Measures
(TPMs)

Increasing
scope of
technical
solution

Technical measures are interdependent

Figure 5.13 Relationship of technical measures. From INCOSE‐TP‐2003‐020‐01 Figure 1.1. Usage per the INCOSE Notices
page. All other rights reserved.

MOEs, which are stated from the acquirer (customer/
user) viewpoint, are the acquirer’s key indicators of
achieving the mission needs for performance, suitability,
and affordability across the life cycle.
Although they are independent of any particular solu­
tion, MOEs are the overall operational success criteria
(e.g., mission performance, safety, operability, opera­
tional availability, etc.) to be used by the acquirer for the
delivered system, services, and/or processes. INCOSE‐
TP‐2003‐020‐01, Technical Measurement Guide
(Roedler and Jones, 2006), Section 3.2.1, provides
further discussion on this topic.
MOPs measure attributes considered as important to
ensure that the system has the capability to achieve
operational objectives. MOPs are used to assess
whether the system meets design or performance
requirements that are necessary to satisfy the MOEs.
MOPs should be derived from or provide insight for
MOEs or other user needs. INCOSE‐TP‐2003‐020‐01,
Technical Measurement Guide, Section 3.2.2, provides
further discussion on this topic.
5.7.2.7 Key Performance Parameters Key Perfor­
mance Parameters (KPPs) are defined in the INCOSE‐
TP‐2003‐020‐01, Technical Measurement Guide (Roedler
and Jones, 2006), as follows:
Key Performance Parameters are a critical subset of the
performance parameters representing those capabilities

and characteristics so significant that failure to meet the
threshold value of performance can be cause for con­
cept, or system selected to be reevaluated or the project
to be reassessed, or terminated.

Each KPP has a threshold and objective value. KPPs
are the minimum number of performance parameters
needed to characterize the major drivers of operational
performance, supportability, and interoperability. The
acquirer defines the KPPs at the time the operational
concepts and requirements are defined.
5.7.2.8 TPMs TPMs are defined in INCOSE‐
TP‐2003‐020‐01, Technical Measurement Guide
(Roedler and Jones, 2006), as follows:
TPMs measure attributes of a system element to deter­
mine how well a system or system element is satisfying
or expected to satisfy a technical requirement or goal.

TPMs are used to assess design progress, compliance
to performance requirements, or technical risks and
provide visibility into the status of important project
technical parameters to enable effective management,
thus enhancing the likelihood of achieving the technical
objectives of the project. TPMs are derived from or pro­
vide insight for the MOPs focusing on the critical
technical parameters of specific architectural elements
of the system as it is designed and implemented.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Quality Assurance Process

135

Specified “not to exceed” value
100%
90
80

Demonstrated
variance

Action team to bring
back into spec
Planned
value
profile

Predicted variance
Current
estimate

70

Achievement
to date
Demonstrated
values

Estimated
value

Proposal
Figure 5.14

Allocated
value

Gate

Calculated
value

Gate

Measured
value

Test

Delivery

TPM monitoring. Reprinted with permission from Kevin Forsberg. All other rights reserved.

Selection of TPMs should be limited to critical technical
thresholds or parameters that, if not met, put the project
at cost, schedule, or performance risk. The TPMs are not
a full listing of the requirements of the system or system
element. The SEMP should define the approach to TPMs
(Roedler and Jones, 2006).
Without TPMs, a project manager could fall into the
trap of relying on cost and schedule status alone, with
perhaps the verbal assurances of technical staff to assess
project progress. This can lead to a product developed on
schedule and within cost that does not meet all key
requirements. Values are established to provide limits
that give early indications if a TPM is out of tolerance, as
illustrated in Figure 5.14.
Periodic recording of the status of each TPM pro­
vides the continuing verification of the degree of antic­
ipated and actual achievement of technical parameters.
Measured values that fall outside an established toler­
ance band alert management to take corrective action.
INCOSE‐TP‐2003‐020‐01, Technical Measurement
Guide, Section 3.2.3, provides further discussion on
this topic.

5.8

Quality Assurance Process

5.8.1 Overview
5.8.1.1

Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,

[6.3.8.1] The purpose of the Quality Assurance process
is to help ensure the effective application of the organi­
zation’s Quality Management process to the project.

5.8.1.2 Description Quality assurance (QA) is broadly
defined as the set of activities throughout the entire project
life cycle necessary to provide adequate confidence that a
product or service conforms to stakeholder require­
ments or that a process adheres to established method­
ology (ASQ, 2007). A subset of the quality management
process, the quality assurance process activities are
defined to provide an independent assessment of whether
development and SE processes are capable of outcomes
that meet requirements and that those processes are per­
formed accurately, precisely, and consistently with all
applicable prescriptions and documentation.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

136

Technical Management Processes

QA provides confidence that the developing organi­
zation, including subcontractors, adheres to established
procedural requirements. Controlling variation in the
development process is key to reducing variation in
development outcomes. Thus, the quality assurance pro­
cess offers a means of introducing checks and balances
into the development process to ensure that errors or cost
or schedule pressures do not result in uncontrolled pro­
cess or procedural changes.
The term “quality assurance” (or QA) is often used
interchangeably with the term “quality control.” However,
the focus of QA is during development activities (proac­
tive), while “quality control” is typically associated with
“inspection” after development activities (reactive).
QA is implemented through procedures for moni­
toring development and production processes and veri­
fying that QA activities are effective in reducing defects
in product or service outcomes. Additionally, QA is
responsible for identification, analysis, and control of
anomalies or errors discovered during life cycle activ­
ities. The level of rigor in QA must be appropriate to
product or service requirements for the system under
development.
Figure 5.15 is the IPO diagram for the quality
assurance process.

5.8.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
quality assurance process are listed in Figure 5.15.
Descriptions of each input and output are provided in
Appendix E.
5.8.1.4 Process Activities The quality assurance pro­
cess includes the following activities:
•• Prepare for quality assurance.
–– Establish and maintain the QA strategy (often
captured in a QA plan).
–– Establish and maintain QA guidelines—policies,
standards, and procedures.
–– Define responsibilities and authorities.
•• Perform product or service evaluations.
–– Perform the evaluations at appropriate times
in the life cycle as defined by the QA plan,
ensuring V&V of the outputs of the life cycle
processes. Ensure that QA perspectives are
appropriately represented during design,
development, verification, validation, and pro­
duction activities.
–– Evaluate product verification results as evidence
of QA effectiveness.

Controls

Inputs

Activities

Outputs

• Quality management
guidelines
• Quality management plan
• Quality management report
• QM corrective actions

• Prepare for quality
assurance
• Perform product or service
evaluations
• Perform process
evaluations
• Manage QA records and
reports
• Treat incidents and
problems

• Quality assurance plan
• Quality assurance report
• Quality assurance
evaluation report
• Quality assurance record

Enablers
Figure 5.15 IPO diagram for the quality assurance process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and Walden.
Usage per the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Quality Assurance Process

•• Perform process evaluations.
–– Implement prescribed surveillance on processes
to provide an independent evaluation of whether
the developing organization is in compliance
with established procedures.
–– Evaluate enabling tools and environments for
conformance and effectiveness.
–– Flow applicable procedural and surveillance
requirements throughout the project supply chain
and evaluate subcontractor processes for confor­
mance to allocated requirements.
•• Manage QA records and reports.
–– Create, maintain, and store records and reports in
accordance with applicable requirements.
–– Identify incidents and problems associated with
product and process evaluations.
•• Treat incidents and problems.
Note: Incidents are short‐term anomalies or obser­
vations that require immediate attention, and prob­
lems are confirmed nonconformities that would
cause the project to fail to meet requirements.
–– Document, classify, report, and analyze all
anomalies.
–– Perform root cause analysis and note trends.
–– Recommend appropriate actions to resolve
anomalies and errors, when indicated.
–– Track all incidents and problems to closure.
Common approaches and tips:
•• Use existing agreements and applicable quality cer­
tifications or registrations (e.g., ISO 9001, CMMI,
etc.), together with the organization’s overarching
quality management policy to provide essential
guidance for QA approaches.
•• Analyze statistics from process audits, verifica­
tion results, product discrepancy reports, customer
satisfaction monitoring, and accident and incident
reporting to verify whether QA activities are
effective.
•• Continually demonstrate uncompromising integ­
rity in monitoring development and SE processes.
There must not be a perception that the devel­
opment organization or project management is
inappropriately influencing the judgment of QA
personnel.

137

•• Establish organizational independence and con­
sistent support from senior leadership. The QA
team should not be completely beholden to the
project manager. Implement an escalation pro­
cess so that QA issues not addressed by the
project can be escalated to organizational leader­
ship, as appropriate.

5.8.2

Elaboration

5.8.2.1 QA Concepts
Quality cannot be “inspected into” products or services
after they are developed. QA performs an important
role in ensuring that all elements of the developing
organization execute activities in accordance with
approved plans and procedures as a means of building
quality into products or services. Through this process
control role, QA enables systematic process improve­
ment. Deming described this relationship between
quality and process improvement: “Quality comes not
from inspection, but from improvement of the produc­
tion process” (Deming, 1986).
QA applies the policies and standards that govern
development activities and procurement of raw mate­
rials in support of quality goals and objectives of the
project. For example, the NASA has adopted the SAE
Aerospace Standard (AS) 9100, Quality Systems—
Aerospace—Model for Quality Assurance in Design,
Development, Production, Installation and Servicing,
as a means of building quality into its systems and
controlling the statistical variation in all system ele­
ments by requiring adherence to a common quality
standard (SAE Aerospace Quality Standard AS9100:C,
2009). Similarly, an acquiring organization may man­
date that suppliers achieve a given CMMI level as a
means of assuring that a given supplier is capable of
delivering a consistent level of quality in its development
processes.
QA also plays a key role during the verification
activities themselves. The presence of independent QA
personnel during verification activities provides an
unbiased perspective on the integrity of verification pro­
cedures and the appropriate calibration of verification
equipment and facilities. QA personnel also provide an
independent assessment that verification results are
accurately recorded. For example, it is not uncommon
to require a QA signature on verification results reports

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

138

Technical Management Processes

to attest that the verification procedures were followed
and the results were accurately reported.
5.8.2.2 QA Methods Common QA techniques include:
•• Checklist—A tool for ensuring all important steps
or actions in an operation have been taken (ASQ,
2007).
•• Quality audit—An independent review to deter­
mine whether project activities comply with
established policies, processes, or procedures.

•• Root cause analysis—A method of problem solving
using specific techniques designed to address the
underlying (root) causes of defects or anomalies.
Popular root cause analysis techniques include
Ishikawa (fishbone) diagrams, FTA, failure mode
effects and criticality analysis, and the five why’s
technique.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

6
Agreement Processes

The initiation of a project begins with user need. Once a
need is perceived and resources are committed to estab­
lish a project, it is possible to define the parameters of an
acquisition and supply relationship. One instance for
which this relationship exists is whenever an organiza­
tion with a need does not have the ability to satisfy that
need without assistance. Agreement processes are defined
in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288 as follows:
[6.1(b)] [Agreement] processes define the activities
necessary to establish an agreement between two
organizations.

Acquisition is also an alternative for optimizing
investment when a supplier can meet the need in a more
economical or timely manner. The acquisition and
supply processes are the subject of Sections 6.1 and 6.2,
respectively.
Virtually all organizations interface with one or more
organizations from industry, academia, government, cus­
tomers, partners, etc. An overall objective of agreement
processes is to identify these external interfaces and
establish the parameters of these relationships, including
identifying the inputs required from the external entities
and the outputs that will be provided to them. This network

of relationships provides the context of the business
environment of the organization and access to future
trends and research. Some relationships are defined by
the exchange of products or services.
The acquisition and supply processes are two sides of
the same coin. Each process establishes the context and
constraints of the agreement under which the other
system life cycle processes are performed, regardless of
whether the agreement is formal (as in a contract) or
informal. The unique activities for the agreement
processes are related to contracts and managing business
relationships. An important contribution of ISO/IEC/
IEEE 15288 is the recognition that systems engineers are
relevant contributors in this domain (Arnold and Lawson,
2003). The maglev train case (see Section 3.6.3) is an
example where the government representatives of China
and Germany participated in the relationship.
Agreement negotiations are handled in various ways
depending on the specific organizations and the for­
mality of the agreement. For example, in formal contract
situations with government agencies, there is usually a
contract negotiation activity that may include multiple
roles for both the acquirer and supplier to refine the
contract terms and conditions. The systems engineer is
usually in a supporting role to the project manager during

INCOSE Systems Engineering Handbook: A Guide for System Life Cycle Processes and Activities, Fourth Edition.
Edited by David D. Walden, Garry J. Roedler, Kevin J. Forsberg, R. Douglas Hamelin and Thomas M. Shortell.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

139

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

140

Agreement Processes

negotiations and is responsible for impact assessments
for changes, trade studies on alternatives, risk assessments,
and other technical input needed for decisions.
A critical element to each party is the definition of
acceptance criteria, such as:
1. Percent completion of the SyRS
2. Requirements stability and growth measures, such
as the number of requirements added, modified, or
deleted during the preceding time interval (e.g.,
month, quarter, etc.)
3. Percent completion of each contract requirements
document: SOW, RFP, etc.
These criteria protect both sides of the business
­relationship—the acquirer from being coerced into accept­
ing a product with poor quality and the supplier from the
unpredictable actions of a fickle or indecisive buyer.
It is important to note that the previous criteria are
negotiated for use during the agreement. During negoti­
ations, it is also critical that both parties are able to track
progress toward an agreement. Identifying where there
are agreements or disagreements for documents and
clauses is vital.
Note also that the agreement processes can be used
for coordinating within an organization between differ­
ent business units or functions. In this case, the agreement
will usually be more informal, not requiring a contract or
other legally binding set of documentation.
Two agreement processes are identified by ISO/IEC/
IEEE 15288: the acquisition process and the supply pro­
cess. They are included in this handbook because they
conduct the essential business of the organization related
to the system of interest (SOI) and establish the relation­
ships between organizations relevant to the acquisi­
tion and supply (i.e., buying and selling) of products
and services.

6.1

Acquisition Process

6.1.1
6.1.1.1

Overview
Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,

[6.1.1.1] The purpose of the Acquisition process is to
obtain a product or service in accordance with the
acquirer’s requirements.

The acquisition process is invoked to establish an
agreement between two organizations under which one
party acquires products or services from the other. The
acquirer experiences a need for an operational system,
for services in support of an operational system, for ele­
ments of a system being developed by a project, or for
services in support of project activities. Often, our expe­
rience with the acquisition process is typified by the pur­
chase of commodities or commercial products, such as
telephones or automobiles. SE is often required to facili­
tate the procurement of more complex services and prod­
ucts. The start of an acquisition/supply process begins
with the determination of, and agreement on, user needs.
The goal is to find a supplier that can meet those needs.
6.1.1.2 Description The role of the acquirer demands
familiarity with the technical, technical management, and
organizational project‐enabling processes as it is through
them that the supplier will execute the agreement. An
acquirer organization applies due diligence in the selec­
tion of a supplier to avoid costly failures and impacts to
the organization budgets and schedules. This section is
written from the perspective of the acquirer organization.
Figure 6.1 is the IPO diagram for the acquisition process.
6.1.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
acquisition process are listed in Figure 6.1. Descriptions
of each input and output are provided in Appendix E.
6.1.1.4 Process Activities The acquisition process
includes the following activities:
•• Prepare for the acquisition.
–– Develop and maintain acquisition plans, policies,
and procedures to meet the organization strat­
egies, goals, and objectives as well as the needs
of the project management and technical SE
organizations.
–– Identify needs in a request for supply—such as an
RFP or request for quotation (RFQ) or some other
mechanism to obtain the supply of the system, ser­
vice, or product. Through the use of the technical
processes, including system requirements defini­
tion, the acquiring organization produces a set of
requirements that will form the basis for the
technical information of the agreement.
–– Identify a list of potential suppliers—suppliers may
be internal or external to the acquirer organization.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Acquisition Process

141

Controls

Inputs

Activities

Outputs

Organization strategic plan
Acquisition need
Enabling system
requirements
Acquisition reply
Acquired system

Prepare for the acquisition
Advertise the acquisition
and select the supplier
Establish and maintain an
agreement
Monitor the agreement
Accept the product or
service

Acquisition strategy
Request for supply
Acquisition agreement
Accepted system or
system element
Acquisition payment
Acquisition report
Acquisition record

Enablers
Figure 6.1 IPO diagram for the acquisition process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and Walden. Usage per
the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

•• Advertise the acquisition and select the supplier.
–– Distribute the RFP, RFQ, or other documented
request for supply and select appropriate sup­
pliers—using selection criteria, rank suppliers by
their suitability to meet the overall need and
establish supplier preferences and corresponding
justifications. Viable suppliers should be willing
to conduct ethical negotiations, able to meet
technical obligations, and willing to maintain
open communications throughout the acquisition
process.
–– Evaluate supplier responses to the RFP or supply
request—ensure the (SOI) meets acquirer needs
and complies with industry and other standards.
Assessments from the project portfolio manage­
ment and quality management processes and rec­
ommendations from the requesting organization
are necessary to determine the suitability of each
response and the ability of the supplier to meet
the stated commitments. Record recommenda­
tions from evaluation of responses to the RFP.
This can range from formal documentation to
less formal interorganizational interactions (e.g.,
between design engineering and marketing).
–– Select the preferred supplier based on acquisition
criteria.

•• Establish and maintain an agreement.
–– Negotiate agreement—the supplier commits to
provide a product or service that satisfies the
specified requirements and acceptance criteria
for the system of interest. Both supplier and
acquirer agree to participate in verification, vali­
dation, and acceptance activities; the acquirer
agrees to render payment according to the
schedule. Both agree to participate in exception
and change control procedures and contribute to
transparent risk management procedures. The
agreement will establish criteria for assessing
progress toward final delivery.
–– Establish delivery acceptance criteria—the pro­
curement specification, in the context of the
overall agreement, should clearly state the cri­
teria by which the acquirer will accept delivery
from the supplier. A verification matrix can be
used to clarify these criteria.
•• Monitor the agreement.
–– Manage acquisition process activities, including
decision making for agreements, relationship build­
ing and maintenance, interaction with organization
management, responsibility for the development of
plans and schedules, and final approval authority for
deliveries accepted from the supplier.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

142

Agreement Processes

–– Maintain communications with supplier, stake­
holders, and other organizations regarding the
project.
–– Status progress against the agreed‐to schedule to
identify risks and issues, to measure progress
toward mitigation of risks and adequacy of
progress toward delivery and cost and schedule
performance, and to determine potential unde­
sirable outcomes for the organization. The
project assessment and control process pro­
vides necessary evaluation information regarding
cost, schedule, and performance.
–– Amend agreements when impacts on schedule,
budget, or performance are identified.
•• Accept the product or service.
–– Accept delivery of products and services—in
accordance with all agreements and relevant
laws and regulations.
–– Render payment—or other agreed consideration
in accordance with agreed payment schedules.
–– Accept responsibility in accordance with all
agreements and relevant laws and regulations.
–– When an acquisition process cycle concludes, a
final review of performance is conducted to
extract lessons learned for continued process
performance.
Note: The agreement is closed through the portfolio
management process, which manages the full set of
­systems and projects of the organization.
Common approaches and tips:
•• Establish acquisition guidance and procedures that
inform acquisition planning, including recom­
mended milestones, standards, assessment criteria,
and decision gates. Include approaches for identi­
fying, evaluating, choosing, negotiating, managing,
and terminating suppliers.
•• Establish a technical point of responsibility within
the organization for monitoring and controlling
individual agreements. This person maintains
communication with the supplier and is part of the
decision‐making team to assess progress in the
execution of the agreement. The possibility of
late delivery or cost overruns should be identified
and communicated to the organization as early as
noted.

Note: There can be multiple points of responsibility for
an agreement that focus on technical, programmatic,
marketing, etc.
•• Define and track measures that indicate progress on
agreements. Appropriate measures require the
development of tailored measures that do not drive
unnecessary and costly efforts but do provide the
information needed to ensure the progress is satis­
factory and that key issues and problems are identi­
fied early to allow time for resolution with minimal
impact to the delivery and quality of the product
and service.
•• Include technical representation in the selection of
the suppliers to critically assess the capability of the
supplier to perform the required task. This helps
reduce the risk of contract failure and its associated
costs, delivery delays, and increased resource com­
mitment needs. Past performance is highly impor­
tant, but changes to key personnel should be identified
and evaluated.
•• Communicate clearly with the supplier about the
real needs and avoid conflicting statements or mak­
ing frequent changes in the statement of need that
introduce risk into the process.
•• Maintain traceability between the supplier’s responses
to the acquirer’s solicitation. This can reduce the risk
of contract modifications, cancellations, or follow‐on
contracts to fix the product or service.
•• Institute for supply management has useful guidance
for purchasing and marketing (ISM, n.d.).
6.2

Supply Process

6.2.1
6.2.1.1

Overview
Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,

[6.1.2.1] The purpose of the Supply process is to p­ rovide
an acquirer with a product or service that meets agreed
requirements.

The supply process is invoked to establish an agreement
between two organizations under which one party
supplies products or services to the other. Within the sup­
plier organization, a project is conducted according to
the recommendations of this handbook with the objective

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Supply Process

of providing a product or service to the acquirer that
meets the contracted requirements. In the case of a mass‐
produced commercial product or service, a marketing
function may represent the acquirer and establish cus­
tomer expectations.
6.2.1.2 Description The supply process is highly
dependent upon the technical, technical management,
and organizational project‐enabling processes as it is
through them that the work of executing the agreement is
accomplished. This means that the supply process is the
larger context in which the other processes are applied
under the agreement. This section is written from the
perspective of the supplier organization. Figure 6.2 is the
IPO diagram for the supply process.
6.2.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
supply process are listed in Figure 6.2. Descriptions of
each input and output are provided in Appendix E.
6.2.1.4 Process Activities The supply process includes
the following activities:
•• Prepare for the supply.
–– Develop and maintain strategic plans, policies,
and procedures to meet the needs of potential
acquirer organizations, as well as internal organi­

143

zation goals and objectives including the needs
of the project management and technical SE
organizations.
–– Identify opportunities.
•• Respond to a tender.
–– Select appropriate acquirers willing to conduct
ethical negotiations, able to meet financial obli­
gations, and willing to maintain open communi­
cations throughout the supply process.
–– Evaluate the acquirer requests and propose a SOI
that meets acquirer needs and complies with
industry and other standards. Assessments from
the project portfolio management, human resource
management, quality management, and business
or mission analysis processes are necessary to
determine the suitability of this response and
the ability of the organization to meet these
commitments.
•• Establish and maintain an agreement.
–– Supplier commits to meet the negotiated require­
ments for the SOI; meet delivery milestones, ver­
ification, validation, and acceptance conditions;
accept the payment schedule; execute exception
and change control procedures; and maintain
transparent risk management procedures. The
agreement will establish criteria for assessing
progress toward final delivery.

Controls

Inputs

Activities

Organization strategic plan
Request for supply
Supply payment
Validated system
Disposed system

Prepare for the supply
Respond to a tender
Establish and maintain an
agreement
Execute the agreement
Deliver and support the
product or service

Outputs
Supply strategy
Supply response
Supply agreement
Supplied system
Supply report
Supply record

Enablers
Figure 6.2 IPO diagram for the supply process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and Walden. Usage per the
INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

144

Agreement Processes

•• Execute the agreement.
–– Start the project and invoke the other processes
defined in this handbook.
–– Manage supply process activities, including
decision making for agreements, relationship
building and maintenance, interaction with orga­
nization management, responsibility for the
development of plans and schedules, and final
approval authority for deliveries made to acquirer.
–– Maintain communications with acquirers, sub­
suppliers, stakeholders, and other organizations
regarding the project.
–– Evaluate carefully the terms of the agreement to
identify risks and issues, progress toward mitiga­
tion of risks, and adequacy of progress toward
delivery; evaluate cost and schedule performance;
and determine potential undesirable outcomes
for the organization.
•• Deliver and support the product or service.
–– After acceptance and transfer of the final prod­
ucts and services, the acquirer will provide
payment or other consideration in accordance
with all agreements, schedules, and relevant laws
and regulations.
–– When a supply process cycle concludes, a final
review of performance is conducted to extract
lessons learned for continued process performance.
Note: The agreement is closed through the portfolio
management process, which manages the full set of systems and projects of the organization. When the project
is closed, action is taken to close the agreement.
Common approaches and tips:
•• Agreements fall into a large range from formal to
very informal based on verbal understanding.
Contracts may call for a fixed price, cost plus fixed

fee, incentives for early delivery, penalties for late
deliveries, and other financial motivators.
•• Relationship building and trust between the parties
is a nonquantifiable quality that, while not a substi­
tute for good processes, makes the human interac­
tions agreeable.
•• Develop technology white papers or similar docu­
ments to demonstrate and describe to the (potential)
acquirer the range of capabilities in areas of interest.
Use traditional marketing approaches to encourage
acquisition of mass‐produced products.
•• Maintain an up‐to‐date Internet presence, even if
the organization does not engage in electronic
commerce.
•• When expertise is not available within the organiza­
tion (e.g., legal and other governmental regulations,
laws, etc.), retain subject matter experts to provide
information and specify requirements related to
agreements.
•• Invest sufficient time and effort into understanding
acquirer needs before the agreement. This can
improve the estimations for cost and schedule and
positively affect agreement execution. Evaluate any
technical specifications for the product or service
for clarity, completeness, and consistency.
•• Involve personnel who will be responsible for
agreement execution to participate in the evaluation
of and response to the acquirer’s request. This
reduces the start‐up time once the project is initi­
ated, which in turn is one way to recapture the cost
of writing the response.
•• Make a critical assessment of the ability of the
organization to execute the agreement; otherwise,
the high risk of failure and its associated costs,
delivery delays, and increased resource commit­
ment needs will reflect negatively on the reputation
of the entire organization.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

7
Organizational Project‐Enabling
Processes

Organizational project‐enabling processes are the purview
of the organization (also known as enterprise) and are
used to direct, enable, control, and support the system
life cycle. Organizational project‐enabling processes are
defined in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288 as follows:
[6.2] The Organizational Project‐Enabling Processes
help ensure the organization’s capability to acquire and
supply products or services through the initiation,
support and control of projects. They provide resources
and infrastructure necessary to support projects ….

This chapter focuses on the capabilities of an organization
relevant to the realization of a system; as stated above, they
are not intended to address general business management
objectives, although sometimes the two overlap.
Organizational units cooperate to develop, produce,
deploy, utilize, support, and retire (including dispose of)
the system of interest (SOI). Enabling systems may also
need to be modified to meet the needs of new systems,
developed, or acquired if they do not exist. Examples
include development, manufacturing, training, verifica­
tion, transport, logistics, maintenance, and disposal sys­
tems that support the SOI.
Six organizational project‐enabling processes are
identified by ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288. They are life cycle

model management, infrastructure management, portfolio
management, human resource management, quality
management (QM), and knowledge management (KM).
The organization will tailor these processes and their
interfaces to meet specific strategic and communications
objectives in support of the system projects.
7.1 Life Cycle Model Management
Process
7.1.1
7.1.1.1

Overview
Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,

[6.2.1.1] The purpose of the Life Cycle Model
Management process is to define, maintain, and assure
availability of policies, life cycle processes, life cycle
models, and procedures for use by the organization with
respect to the scope of [ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288].

The value propositions to be achieved by instituting
organization‐wide processes for use by projects are as
follows:
•• Provide repeatable/predictable performance across
the projects in the organization (this helps the

INCOSE Systems Engineering Handbook: A Guide for System Life Cycle Processes and Activities, Fourth Edition.
Edited by David D. Walden, Garry J. Roedler, Kevin J. Forsberg, R. Douglas Hamelin and Thomas M. Shortell.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

145

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

146

Organizational Project‐Enabling Processes

organization in planning and estimating future pro­
jects and in demonstrating reliability to customers)
•• Leverage practices that have been proven success­
ful by certain projects and instill those in other pro­
jects across the organization (where applicable)
•• Enable process improvement across the organization
•• Improve ability to efficiently transfer staff across pro­
jects as roles are defined and performed consistently
•• Enable leveraging lessons that are learned from one
project for future projects to improve performance
and avoid issues
•• Improve startup of new projects (less reinventing
the wheel)
In addition, the standardization across projects may enable
cost savings through economies of scale for support activ­
ities (tool support, process documentation, etc.).
7.1.1.2 Description This process (i) establishes and
maintains a set of policies and procedures at the

organization level that support the organization’s
ability to acquire and supply products and services and
(ii) provides integrated system life cycle models
necessary to meet the organization’s strategic plans,
policies, goals, and objectives for all projects and all
system life cycle stages. The processes are defined,
adapted, and maintained to support the requirements of
the organization, SE organizational units, individual
projects, and personnel. Life cycle model management
processes are supplemented by recommended methods
and tools. The resulting guidelines in the form of orga­
nization policies and procedures are still subject to
tailoring by projects, as discussed in Chapter 8.
Figure 7.1 is the IPO diagram for the life cycle model
management process.
7.1.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
life cycle model management process are listed in
Figure 7.1. Descriptions of each input and output are
provided in Appendix E.

Controls

Inputs
Organization strategic plan
Organization tailoring
strategy
Quality management
evaluation report
QM corrective actions

Activities
Establish the process
Assess the process
Improve the process

Outputs
Life cycle model
management plan
Organization policies,
procedures, and assets
Life cycle models
Organizational process
performance measures
needs
Organizational process
performance measures data
Life cycle model
management report
Life cycle model
management record

Enablers
Figure 7.1 IPO diagram for the life cycle model management process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and
Walden. Usage per the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Life Cycle Model Management Process

7.1.1.4 Process Activities The life cycle model
management process includes the following activities:
•• Establish the process.
–– Identify sources (organization, corporate, industry,
academia, stakeholders, and customers) of life
cycle model management process information.
–– Distill the information from multiple sources
into an appropriate set of life cycle models that
are aligned with the organization and business
area plans and infrastructure.
–– Establish life cycle model management guidelines
in the form of plans, policies, procedures, tailoring
guidance, models, and methods and tools for
controlling and directing the life cycle models.
–– Define, integrate, and communicate life cycle model
roles, responsibilities, authorities, requirements,
measures, and performance criteria based on the life
cycle model management process guidelines.
–– Use business achievements to establish entrance
and exit criteria for decision gates.
–– Disseminate policies, procedures, and directives
throughout the organization.
•• Assess the process.
–– Use assessments and reviews of the life cycle
models to confirm the adequacy and effectiveness
of the life cycle model management processes.
–– Identify opportunities to improve the organiza­
tion life cycle model management guidelines on
a continuing basis based on individual project
assessments, individual feedback, and changes in
the organization strategic plan.
–– Lessons learned and measurement results from
process performance on projects should be used
as significant sources from which to identify
improvements.
•• Improve the process.
–– Prioritize and implement the identified improve­
ment opportunities.
–– Communicate with all relevant organizations
regarding the creation of and changes in the life
cycle model management guideline.
Common approaches and tips:
•• Base the policies and procedures on an organization‐
level strategic and business area plan that ­provides

147

a comprehensive understanding of the organization’s
goals, objectives, stakeholders, competitors, future
business, and technology trends.
•• Ensure that policy and procedure compliance review is
included as part of the business decision gate criteria.
•• Develop a life cycle model management process
information database with essential information that
provides an effective mechanism for disseminating
consistent guidelines and providing announce­
ments about organization‐related topics, as well as
industry trends, research findings, and other rele­
vant information. This provides a single point of
contact for continuous communication regarding
the life cycle model management guidelines and
encourages the collection of valuable feedback and
the identification of organization trends.
•• Establish an organization center of excellence for life
cycle model management processes. This organiza­
tion can become the focal point for the collection of
relevant information, dissemination of guidelines,
and analysis of assessments and feedback. They can
also develop checklists and other templates to support
project assessments to ensure that the predefined
measures and criteria are used for evaluation.
•• Manage the network of external relationships by
assigning personnel to identify standards, industry
and academia research, and other sources of organi­
zation management information and concepts
needed by the organization.
The network of relationships includes government,
industry, and academia. Each of these external inter­
faces provides unique and essential information for
the organization to succeed in business and meet the
continued need and demand for improved and effec­
tive systems and products for its customers. It is up to
the life cycle model management process to fully
define and utilize these external entities and inter­
faces (i.e., their value, importance, and capabilities
that are required by the organization):
–– Legislative, regulatory, and other government
requirements
–– Industry SE and management‐related standards,
training, and capability maturity models
–– Academic education, research results, future
concepts and perspectives, and requests for finan­
cial support

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

148

Organizational Project‐Enabling Processes

•• Establish an organization communication plan for
the policies and procedures. Most of the processes in
this handbook include dissemination activities. An
effective set of communication methods is needed to
ensure that all stakeholders are well informed.
•• Ensure the methods and tools for enabling the
application of life cycle model management
processes are effective and tailored to the imple­
mentation approach of the organization and its pro­
jects. A responsible organization can be created or
designated to coordinate the identification and
development of partnerships and/or relationships
with tool vendors and working groups. They can
recommend the use of methods and tools that are
intended to help personnel avoid confusion, frustra­
tion, and wasting valuable time and money. These
experts may also establish an integrated tool envi­
ronment between interacting tools to avoid cumber­
some (and inaccurate) data transfer.
•• Include stakeholders, such as engineering and
project management organizations, as participants
in developing the life cycle model management
guidelines. This increases their commitment to
the recommendations and incorporates a valuable
source of organization experience.
•• Develop alternative life cycle models based on the
type, scope, complexity, and risk of a project. This
decreases the need for tailoring by engineering and
project organizations.
Standard engineering
processes and practices

Process
requirements

Policies
Standard SE process
Standard SE practices
Standard functional
processes

•• Provide clear guidelines for tailoring and adaptation.
•• Work continually to improve the life cycle models
and processes.
7.1.2

Elaboration

7.1.2.1 Standard SE Processes An organization
engaged in SE provides the requirements for establish­
ing, maintaining, and improving the standard SE process
and the policies, practices, and supporting functional
processes (see Fig. 7.2) necessary to meet customer
needs throughout the organization. Further, it defines the
process for tailoring the standard SE process for use on
projects and for making improvements to the project‐tai­
lored SE processes.
Organizational management must review and
approve the standard SE process and changes to it.
Organizations should consider establishing an SE
Process Group (SYSPG) to oversee SE process defini­
tion and implementation.
An organization defines or selects a standard set of SE
processes for use as a reference SE process model, which
is tailored by projects to meet specific customer and stake­
holder needs. The reference model should tailor industry,
government, or other agency “best practices” based on
multiple government, industry, and organization reference
SE process documents. The reference SE model includes
an SE process improvement requirements, activity, or
process to ensure ongoing evaluation and improvement
Standard process
reviews, audits and
lessons learned
Process reviews
Assessments and audits
Lessons learned
reviews
Other capability
reviews
(benchmarks, best
practices, conferences,
symposia)

Analysis and change
definition
Conduct analyses of
process effectiveness
and compliance
Analyze standard
process
benefits, costs and
improvements
Develop targeted
improvements and
changes
Review and approvals

Standard process feedback and change
Figure 7.2 Standard SE process flow. INCOSE SEH v2 Figure 5.3. Usage per the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights
reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Infrastructure Management Process

actions that take advantage of lessons learned. Projects
are expected to follow this process, as tailored to meet
project‐specific SE process needs. The standard process
must be tailorable, extensible, and scalable to meet a
diverse range of projects, from small study projects to
large projects requiring thousands of participants.
The standard SE process model can be established by
selection of specific processes and practices from this
handbook, industry SE process references (such as ISO/
IEC/IEEE 15288 and ANSI/EIA‐632), and government
SE process references, as appropriate, and is applicable
to every engineering capability maturity focus area or
process area in the CMMI® approach (CMMI Product
Team, 2010).
A high‐performing organization also reviews the pro­
cess (as well as work products), conducts assessments
and audits (e.g., CMMI assessments and ISO audits),
retains corporate memory through the understanding of
lessons learned, and establishes how benchmarked
processes and practices of related organizations can
affect the organization. Successful organizations should
analyze their process performance, its effectiveness and
compliance to organizational and higher directed stan­
dards, and the associated benefits and costs and then
develop targeted improvements.
The basic requirements for standard and project‐tai­
lored SE process control, based on CMMI and other
resources, are as follows:
1. Process responsibilities for projects:
i. Identify SE processes.
ii. Document the implementation and mainte­
nance of SE processes.
iii. Use a defined set of standard methods and
techniques to support the SE processes.
iv. Apply accepted tailoring guidelines to the
standard SE processes to meet project‐specific
needs.
2. Good process definition includes:
i. Inputs and outputs
ii. Entrance and exit criteria
3. Process responsibilities for organizations and projects:
i. Assess strengths and weaknesses in the SE
processes.
ii. Compare the SE processes to benchmark
processes used by other organizations.

149

iii. Institute SE process reviews and audits of the
SE processes.
iv. Institute a means to capture and act on lessons
learned from SE process implementation on
projects.
v. Institute a means to analyze potential changes
for improvement to the SE processes.
vi. Institute measures that provide insight into
the performance and effectiveness of the SE
processes.
vii. Analyze the process measures and other
information to determine the effectiveness of
the SE processes.
Although it should be encouraged to identify and capture
lessons learned throughout the performance of every
project, the SE organization must plan and follow
through to collect lessons learned at predefined mile­
stones in the system life cycle. The SE organization
should periodically review lessons learned together with
the measures and other information to analyze and
improve SE processes and practices. The results need to
be communicated and incorporated into training. It
should also establish best practices and capture them in
an easy‐to‐retrieve form.
For more information on process definition,
assessment, and improvement, see the resources in the
bibliography, including the CMMI.
7.2 Infrastructure Management
Process
7.2.1

Overview

7.2.1.1 Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,
[6.2.2.1] The purpose of the Infrastructure Management
process is to provide the infrastructure and services to
projects to support organization and project objectives
throughout the life cycle.

7.2.1.2 Description The work of the organization is
accomplished through projects, which are conducted
within the context of the infrastructure environment. This
infrastructure needs to be defined and understood within
the organization and the project to ensure alignment of
the working units and achievement of overall organization

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

150

Organizational Project‐Enabling Processes

Controls

Inputs

Activities

Outputs

Organization strategic plan
Organization infrastructure
needs
Project infrastructure needs

Establish the infrastructure
Maintain the infrastructure

Infrastructure management
plan
Organization infrastructure
Project infrastructure
Infrastructure management
report
Infrastructure management
record

Enablers
Figure 7.3 IPO diagram for the infrastructure management process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and
Walden. Usage per the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

strategic objectives. This process exists to establish,
communicate, and continuously improve the system life
cycle process environment. Figure 7.3 is the IPO diagram
for the infrastructure management process.
7.2.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
infrastructure management process are listed in
Figure 7.3. Descriptions of each input and output are
provided in Appendix E.
7.2.1.4 Process Activities The infrastructure manage­
ment process includes the following activities:
•• Establish the infrastructure.
–– Gather and negotiate infrastructure resource
needs with organization and projects.
–– Establish the infrastructure resources and ser­
vices to ensure organization goals and objectives
are met.
–– Manage resource and service conflicts and short­
falls with steps for resolution.
•• Maintain the infrastructure.
–– Manage infrastructure resource availability to
ensure organization goals and objectives are met.
Conflicts and resource shortfalls are managed
with steps for resolution.

–– Allocate infrastructure resources and services to
support all projects.
–– Control multiproject infrastructure resource manage­­
ment communications to effectively allocate resources
throughout the organization, and identify potential
future or existing conflict issues and problems with
recommendations for resolution.
Common approaches and tips:
•• Qualified resources may be leased (insourced or
outsourced) or licensed in accordance with the
investment strategy.
•• Establish an organization infrastructure architecture.
Integrating the infrastructure of the organization
can make the execution of routine business activ­
ities more efficient.
•• Establish a resource management information
system with enabling support systems and services
to maintain, track, allocate, and improve the
resources for present and future organization needs.
Computer‐based equipment tracking, facilities allo­
cation, and other systems are recommended for
organizations with over 50 people.
•• Attend to physical factors, including facilities and
human factors, such as ambient noise level and
computer access to specific tools and applications.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Portfolio Management Process

•• Begin planning in early life cycle stages of all
system development efforts to address utilization
and support resource requirements for system
transition, facilities, infrastructure, information/
data storage, and management. Enabling resources
should also be identified and integrated into the
organization’s infrastructure.
7.2.2

Elaboration

7.2.2.1 Infrastructure Management Concepts Projects
all need resources to meet their objectives. Project plan­
ners determine the resources needed by the project and
attempt to anticipate both current and future needs. The
infrastructure management process provides the mecha­
nisms whereby the organization infrastructure is made
aware of project needs and the resources are scheduled to
be in place when requested. While this can be simply
stated, it is less simply executed. Conflicts must be nego­
tiated and resolved, equipment must be obtained and
sometimes repaired, buildings need to be refurbished, and
information technology services are in a state of constant
change. The infrastructure management organization col­
lects the needs, negotiates to remove conflicts, and is
responsible for providing the enabling organization infra­
structure without which nothing else can be accom­
plished. Since resources are not free, their costs are also
factored into investment decisions. Financial resources
are addressed under the portfolio management process,
but all other resources, except for human resources (see
Section 7.4), are addressed under this process.
Infrastructure management is complicated by the
number of sources for requests, the need to balance the
skills of the labor pool against the other infrastructure
elements (e.g., computer‐based tools), the need to
maintain a balance between the budgets of individual
projects and the cost of resources, the need to keep
apprised of new or modified policies and procedures
that might influence the skills inventory, and myriad
unknowns.
Resources are allocated based on requests. Infras­
tructure management collects the needs of all the pro­
jects in the active portfolio and schedules or acquires
nonhuman assets, as needed. Additionally, the infra­
structure managem­ent process maintains and manages
the facilities, hardware, and support tools required by the
portfolio of organization projects. Infrastructure manage­
ment is the efficient and effective deployment of an

151

organization’s resources when and where they are
needed. Such resources may include inventory, produc­
tion resources, or information technology. The goal is to
provide materials and services to a project when they are
needed to keep the project on target and on budget. A
balance should be found between efficiency and
robustness. Infrastructure management relies heavily on
forecasts into the future of the demand and supply of
various resources.
The organization environment and subsequent
investment decisions are built on the existing organiza­
tion infrastructure, including facilities, equipment, per­
sonnel, and knowledge. Efficient use of these resources
is achieved by exploiting opportunities to share enabling
systems or to use a common system element on more
than one project. These opportunities are enabled by
good communications within the organization.
Integration and interoperability of supporting systems,
such as financial, human resources (see Section 7.4),
and training, is critically important to executing organi­
zation strategic objectives. Feedback from active pro­
jects is used to refine and continuously improve the
infrastructure.
Further, trends in the market may suggest changes in
the supporting environment. Assessment of the avail­
ability and suitability of the organization infrastructure
and associated resources provides feedback for improve­
ment and reward mechanisms. All organization processes
require mandatory compliance with government and
corporate laws and regulations. Decision making is
­
­governed by the organization strategic plan.
7.3 Portfolio Management Process
7.3.1

Overview

7.3.1.1 Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,
[6.2.3.1] The purpose of the Portfolio Management
­process is to initiate and sustain necessary, sufficient and
suitable projects in order to meet the strategic objectives
of the organization.

Portfolio management also provides organizational
output regarding the set of projects, systems, and technical
investments of the organization to external stakeholders,
such as parent organizations, investors/funding sources,
and governance bodies.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

152

Organizational Project‐Enabling Processes

7.3.1.2 Description Projects create the products or
services that generate income for an organization.
Thus, the conduct of successful projects requires an
adequate allocation of funding and resources and the
authority to deploy them to meet project objectives.
Most business entities manage the commitment of
financial resources using well‐defined and closely
monitored processes.
The portfolio management process also performs
ongoing evaluation of the projects and systems in its
portfolio. Based on periodic assessments, projects are
determined to justify continued investment if they have
the following characteristics:

7.3.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
portfolio management process are listed in Figure 7.4.
Descriptions of each input and output are provided in
Appendix E.
7.3.1.4 Process Activities The portfolio management
process includes the following activities:

•• Contribute to the organization strategy
•• Progress toward achieving established goals
•• Comply with project directives from the organization
•• Are conducted according to an approved plan
•• Provide a service or product that is still needed and
providing acceptable investment returns
Otherwise, projects may be redirected or, in extreme
instances, cancelled. Figure 7.4 is the IPO diagram for
the portfolio management process.

•• Define and authorize projects.
–– Identify, assess, and prioritize investment oppor­
tunities consistent with the organization strategic
plan.
–– Establish business area plans—use the strategic
objectives to identify candidate projects to fulfill
them.
–– Establish project scope, define project manage­
ment accountabilities and authorities, and iden­
tify expected project outcomes.
–– Establish the domain area of the product line
defined by its main features and their suitable
variability.
–– Allocate adequate funding and other resources.
–– Identify interfaces and opportunities for multi­
project synergies.

Controls

Inputs

Activities

Outputs

Organization strategic plan
Organization portfolio
direction and constraints
Supply strategy
Project status report

Define and authorize
projects
Evaluate the portfolio of
projects
Terminate projects

Portfolio management plan
Organization infrastructure
needs
Project direction
Project portfolio
Organization lesson learned
Portfolio management
report
Portfolio management
record

Enablers
Figure 7.4 IPO diagram for the portfolio management process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and Walden.
Usage per the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Portfolio Management Process

–– Specify the project governance process including
organizational status reporting and reviews.
–– Authorize project execution.
•• Evaluate the portfolio of projects.
–– Evaluate ongoing projects to provide rationale
for continuation, redirection, or termination.
•• Terminate projects.
–– Close, cancel, or suspend projects that are com­
pleted or designated for termination.
Common approaches and tips:
•• The process of developing the business area plans
helps the organization assess where it needs to
focus resources to meet present and future strategic
objectives. Include representatives from relevant
stakeholders in the organization community.
•• When investment opportunities present themselves,
prioritize them based on measurable criteria such
that projects can be objectively evaluated against a
threshold of acceptable performance.
•• Expected project outcomes should be based on
clearly defined, measurable criteria to ensure that an
objective assessment of progress can be determined.
Specify the investment information that will be
assessed for each milestone. Initiation should be a
formal milestone that does not occur until all
resources are in place as identified in the project
plan.
•• Establish a program office or other coordination
organization to manage the synergies between active
projects in the organization portfolio. Complex and
large organization architectures require the manage­
ment and coordination of multiple interfaces and
make additional demands on investment decisions.
These interactions occur within and between the
projects.
•• Set a product line approach when different cus­
tomers need the same or similar systems (i.e.,
common features), with some customizations (i.e.,
variants).
•• Include risk assessments (see Section 5.4) in the
evaluation of ongoing projects. Projects that con­
tain risks that may pose a challenge in the future
might require redirection. Cancel or suspend pro­
jects whose disadvantages or risks to the organiza­
tion outweigh the investment.

153

•• Include opportunity assessments in the evaluation
of ongoing projects. Addressing project challenges
may represent a positive investment opportunity for
the organization. Avoid pursuing opportunities that
are inconsistent with the capabilities of the organi­
zation and its strategic goals and objectives or
­contain unacceptably high technical risk, resource
demands, or uncertainty.
•• Allocate resources based on the requirements of the
projects; otherwise, the risk of cost and schedule
overruns may have a negative impact on quality and
performance of the project.
•• Establish effective governance processes that
directly support investment decision making and
communications with project management.
7.3.2

Elaboration

7.3.2.1 Define the Business Case and Develop
Business Area Plans Portfolio management balances
the use of financial assets within the organization.
Organization management generally demands that there
be some beneficial return for the effort expended in pur­
suing a project. The business case and associated
business area plans establish the scope of required
resources (e.g., people and money) and schedule and set
reasonable expectations. An important element of each
control design gate is a realistic review of the business
case as the project matures. The result is reverification or
perhaps restatement of the business case. The Iridium
case, described in Section 3.2, illustrates the dangers of
failing to keep a realistic perspective. Similarly, despite
the technological triumph of implementing the world’s
first maglev train line (Section 3.6.3), the exorbitant
initial cost and slow return on investment are causing
authorities to question plans to build another line.
The business case may be validated in a variety of
ways. For large projects, sophisticated engineering
models, or even prototypes of key system elements, help
prove that the objectives of the business case can be met
and that the system will work as envisioned prior to
committing large amounts of resources to full‐scale
­
engineering and manufacturing development. For very
complex systems, such a demonstration can be con­
ducted at perhaps 20% of development cost. For smaller
projects, when the total investment is modest, proof‐of‐
concept models may be constructed during the concept
stage to prove the validity of business case assumptions.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

154

Organizational Project‐Enabling Processes

Investment opportunities are not all equal, and organi­
zations are limited in the number of projects that can
be conducted concurrently. Further, some investments
are not well aligned with the overall strategic plan of the
organization. For these reasons, opportunities are evalu­
ated against the portfolio of existing agreements and
ongoing projects, taking into consideration the attain­
ability of the stakeholders’ requirements.

7.4 Human Resource Management
Process
7.4.1
7.4.1.1

Overview
Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,

Project planners determine the resources needed for
the project by anticipating both current and future needs.
The human resource management process provides the
mechanisms whereby the organization management is
made aware of project needs and personnel are sched­
uled to be in place when requested. While this can be
simply stated, it is less simply executed. Conflicts must
be resolved, personnel must be trained, and employees
are entitled to vacations and time away from the job.
The human resource management organization col­
lects the needs, negotiates to remove conflicts, and is
responsible for providing the personnel without which
nothing else can be accomplished. Since qualified per­
sonnel are not free, their costs are also factored into
investment decisions. Figure 7.5 is the IPO diagram for
the human resource management process.

[6.2.4.1] The purpose of the Human Resource
Management process is to provide the organization
with necessary human resources and to maintain their
­competencies, consistent with business needs.

7.4.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
human resource management process are listed in
Figure 7.5. Descriptions of each input and output are
provided in Appendix E.

7.4.1.2 Description Projects all need resources to
meet their objectives. This process deals with human
resources. Nonhuman resources, including tools, data­
bases, communication systems, financial systems, and
information technology, are addressed using the infra­
structure management process (see Section 7.2).

7.4.1.4 Processes Activities The human resource
management process includes the following activities:
•• Identify skills.
–– The skills of the existing personnel are identified
to establish a “skills inventory.”

Controls

Inputs

Activities

Organization strategic plan
Project portfolio
Project human resources
needs

Identify skills
Develop skills
Acquire and provide skills

Outputs
Human resource
management plan
Qualified personnel
Human resource
management report
Human resource
management record

Enablers
Figure 7.5 IPO diagram for the human resource management process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and
Walden. Usage per the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Human Resource Management Process

–– Review current and anticipated projects to deter­
mine the skills needed across the portfolio of
projects.
–– Skill needs are evaluated against available peo­
ple with the prerequisite skills to determine if
training or hiring activities are indicated.
•• Develop skills.
–– Obtain (or develop) and deliver training to close
identified gaps of project personnel.
–– Identify assignments that lead toward career
progression.
•• Acquire and provide skills.
–– Provide human resources to support all projects.
–– Train or hire qualified personnel when gaps indi­
cate that skill needs cannot be met with existing
personnel.
–– Maintain communication across projects to
effectively allocate human resources throughout
the organization, and identify potential future or
existing conflicts and problems with recommen­
dations for resolution.
–– Other related assets are scheduled or, if necessary,
acquired.
Common approaches and tips:
•• The availability and suitability of personnel is one of
the critical project assessments and provides
feedback for improvement and reward mechanisms.
•• Consider using an IPDT environment as a means to
reduce the frequency of project rotation, recognize
progress and accomplishments and reward success,
and establish apprentice and mentoring programs
for newly hired employees and students.
•• Maintain a pipeline of qualified candidates that are
interested in joining the organization as employees
or temporary staff. Focus recruitment, training, and
retention efforts on personnel with experience
levels, skills, and subject matter expertise demanded
by the projects. Personnel assessments should
review proficiency, motivation, and ability to work
in a team environment, as well as the need to be
retrained, reassigned, or relocated.
•• Personnel are allocated based on requests and con­
flicts are negotiated. The goal is to provide per­
sonnel to a project when they are needed to keep the
project on target and on budget.

155

•• A key concern is keeping project personnel from
becoming overcommitted, especially persons with
specialized skills.
•• Skills inventory and career development plans are
important documentation that can be validated by
engineering and project management.
•• Qualified personnel and other resources may be
hired temporarily—insourced or outsourced in
accordance with the organizational strategy.
•• Encourage personnel to engage in external net­
works as a means of keeping abreast of new ideas
and attracting new talent to the organization.
•• Maintain an organization career development
program that is not sidetracked by project demands.
Develop a policy that all personnel receive training
or educational benefits on a regular cycle. This
includes both undergraduate and graduate studies,
in‐house training courses, certifications, tutorials,
workshops, and conferences.
•• Remember to provide training on organization
policies and procedures and system life cycle
­
processes.
•• Establish a resource management information
infrastructure with enabling support systems and
services to maintain, track, allocate, and improve
the resources for present and future organization
needs. Computer‐based human resource allocation
and other systems are recommended for organiza­
tions over 50 people.
•• Use the slack time in the beginning of a project to
obtain and train the necessary people to avoid a
shortfall of skilled engineers, technologists, man­
agers, and operations experts.
•• Trends in the market may suggest changes in the
composition of project teams and the supporting IT
environment.
•• All organization processes require mandatory com­
pliance with government and corporate laws and
regulations.
•• Employee performance reviews should be con­
ducted regularly, and career development plans
should be managed and aligned to the objectives of
both the employee and the organization. Career
development plans should be reviewed, tracked,
and refined to provide a mechanism to help manage
the employee’s career within the organization.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

156

Organizational Project‐Enabling Processes

7.4.2

Elaboration

7.4.2.1 Human Resource Management Concepts
The human resource management process maintains and
manages the people required by the portfolio of organi­
zation projects. Human resource management is the effi­
cient and effective deployment of qualified personnel
when and where they are needed. A balance should be
found between efficiency and robustness. Human
resource management relies heavily on forecasts into the
future of the demand and supply of various resources.
The primary objective of this process is to provide a
pool of qualified personnel to the organization. This is com­
plicated by the number of sources for requests, the need to
balance the skills of the labor pool against the other infra­
structure elements (e.g., computer‐based tools), the need to
maintain a balance between the budgets of individual pro­
jects and the cost of resources, the need to keep apprised of
new or modified policies and procedures that might
influence the skills inventory, and myriad unknowns.
Project managers face their resource challenges com­
peting for scarce talent in the larger organization pool.
They must balance access to the experts they need for
special studies with stability in the project team with its
tacit knowledge and project memory. Today’s projects
depend on teamwork and optimally multidisciplinary
teams. Such teams are able to resolve project issues
quickly through direct communication between team
members. Such intrateam communication shortens the
decision‐making cycle and is more likely to result in
improved decisions because the multidisciplinary per­
spectives are captured early in the process.

7.5

Quality Management Process

7.5.1
7.5.1.1

Overview
Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,

[6.2.5.1] The purpose of the Quality Management
­process is to assure that products, services and imple­
mentations of the quality management process meet
organizational and project quality objectives and achieve
customer satisfaction.

7.5.1.2 Description The quality management process
makes visible the goals of the organization toward customer
satisfaction. Since primary drivers in any project are time,

cost, and quality, inclusion of a quality management pro­
cess is essential to every organization. Many of the system
life cycle processes are concerned with quality issues, and
this forms some of the justification for exerting time,
money, and energy into establishing these processes in the
organization. Application of this handbook is one approach
toward inserting a quality discipline into an organization.
Quality management (QM) process establishes,
implements, and continuously improves the focus on
customer satisfaction and organization goals and objec­
tives. There is a cost to managing quality as well as a
benefit. The effort and time required to manage quality
should not exceed the overall value gained from the pro­
cess. Figure 7.6 is the IPO diagram for the quality
management process.
7.5.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
quality management process are listed in Figure 7.6.
Descriptions of each input and output are provided in
Appendix E.
7.5.1.4 Process Activities The quality management
process includes the following activities:
•• Plan quality management.
–– Identify, assess, and prioritize quality guidelines
consistent with the organization strategic plan.
Establish QM guidelines—policies, standards,
and procedures.
–– Establish organization and project QM goals and
objectives.
–– Establish organization and project QM responsi­
bilities and authorities.
•• Assess quality management.
–– Evaluate project assessments.
–– Assess customer satisfaction against compliance
with requirements and objectives.
–– Continuously improve the QM guidelines.
•• Perform quality management corrective action and
preventive action.
–– Recommend appropriate action, when indicated.
–– Maintain open communications—within the
organization and with stakeholders.
Common approaches and tips:
•• Quality is a daily focus—not an afterthought!

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Quality Management Process

157

Controls

Inputs

Activities

Outputs

Organization strategic plan
Quality assurance plan
Quality assurance report
Quality assurance evaluation
report
Customer satisfaction inputs

Plan quality management
Assess quality
management
Perform quality
management corrective
action and preventive
action

Quality management plan
Quality management
guidelines
QM corrective actions
Quality management report
Quality management
evaluation report
Quality management record

Enablers
Figure 7.6 IPO diagram for the quality management process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and Walden.
Usage per the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

•• Strategic documentation, including quality policy,
mission, strategies, goals, and objectives, provides
essential inputs for analysis and synthesis of quality
impacts, requirements, and solutions. Existing
agreements also provide direction regarding the
appropriate level of attention given to quality within
the organization.
•• Management commitment to quality is reflected in
the strategic planning of the organization—the rest
of the organization will follow. Everyone in the
organization should know the quality policy.
•• Development of a QM intranet and information
database with essential information provides an
effective mechanism for disseminating consis­
tent guidelines and providing announcements
about related topics, as well as industry trends,
research findings, and other relevant information.
This provides a single point of contact for con­
tinuous communication regarding the QM guide­
lines and encourages the collection of valuable
feedback and the identification of organization
trends.
•• Analyze statistics from process audits, tests and
evaluations, product discrepancy reports, customer
satisfaction monitoring, accident and incident
reporting, and the implementation of changes to

items of a product (e.g., recalled product and/or
production lines).
•• QM is big business, and a plethora of standards,
methods, and techniques exist to help an organi­
zation. A short list includes the ISO 9000 series,
total quality management (TQM), and Six Sigma
(statistical process control) (Brenner, 2006).
According to ISO 9001 (2008), quality is the
“Ability of a set of inherent characteristics of a
product, system, or process to fulfill requirements
of customers and other interested parties.”
•• A successful strategy is to aim at achieving
­customer satisfaction primarily by preventing non­
fulfillment of requirements. Ideally, customer satis­
faction is linked to compliance with requirements.
Two indicators that the process is not working are
situations where (i) the project is compliant but the
customer is unhappy or (ii) the project is not com­
pliant but the customer is happy.
•• The consistent involvement and commitment of top
management with timely decision making is
mandatory for the quality program. This is reflected
in staffing and training of project auditors.
•• Project assessments include measurements that can be
evaluated to determine the performance of a project
team and the progress toward a quality outcome.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

158

Organizational Project‐Enabling Processes

•• Trends in tailoring of project‐specific quality plans
provide clear indications of potential improvements
in the overall organization guidelines.
•• The team of people working in this process will
also find a wealth of material in ISO standards and
other sources.
•• The quality program should have an escalation
mechanism so that findings/issues not addressed by
the project can be raised to senior management.
Projects are under schedule/resource constraints
and may not always be responsive to quality find­
ings. In these situations, there should be a mecha­
nism to raise this to senior management to alert
them to potential impacts and help them to deter­
mine how to proceed.
7.5.2

Elaboration

7.5.2.1 QM Concepts The purpose of QM is to out­
line the policies and procedures necessary to improve
and control the various processes within the organization
that ultimately lead to improved business performance.
The primary objective of QM is to produce an end
result that meets or exceeds stakeholder expectations.
For example, using a quality system program, manufac­
turers establish requirements for each type or family of
product to achieve products that are safe and effective.
To meet this objective, they establish methods and proce­
dures to design, produce, distribute, service, and docu­
ment devices that meet the quality system requirements.
QM is closely related to the V&V processes.
Quality assurance (QA) is generally associated with
activities such as failure testing, statistical control, and
total quality control. Many organizations use statistical
process control as a means to achieve Six Sigma levels of
quality. Traditional statistical process controls use
random sampling to test a fraction of the output for vari­
ances within critical tolerances. When these are found,
the manufacturing processes are corrected before more
bad parts can be produced.
Quality experts (Crosby, 1979; Juran, 1974) have
determined that if quality cannot be measured, it cannot
be systematically improved. Assessment provides the
feedback needed to monitor performance, make mid­
course corrections, diagnose difficulties, and pinpoint
improvement opportunities. A widely used paradigm for
QA management is the plan–do–check–act approach,
also known as the Shewhart cycle (Shewhart, 1939).

Quality pioneer W. Edwards Deming stressed that
meeting user needs represents the defining criterion for
quality and that all members of an organization need to
participate actively in “constant and continuous” quality
improvement—to commit to the idea that “good enough
isn’t” (Deming, 1986). His advice marked a shift from
inspecting for quality after production to building
­concern for quality into organization processes. As an
example, in 1981, Ford launched a “Quality is Job 1”
campaign that went beyond getting good workers and
supporting them with high‐quality training, facilities,
equipment, and raw materials. By characterizing quality
as a “job,” everyone in the organization was motivated to
concern themselves with quality and its improvement—
for every product and customer (Scholtes, 1988).
Total quality control deals with understanding what
the stakeholder/customer really wants. If the original
need statement does not reflect the relevant quality
requirements, then quality can be neither inspected nor
manufactured into the product. For instance, the Øresund
Bridge consortium included not only the bridge material
and dimensions but also operating, environmental,
safety, reliability, and maintainability requirements.
Product certification is the process of certifying that a
certain product has passed performance or QA tests or
qualification requirements stipulated in regulations, such
as a building code or nationally accredited test standards,
or that it complies with a set of regulations governing
quality or minimum performance requirements. Today,
medical device manufacturers are advised to use good
judgment when developing their quality system and
apply those sections of the Food and Drug Administration
Quality System Regulation that are applicable to their
specific products and operations. The regulation 21‐
CFR‐820.5 is continuously updated since its release in
1996. As such, it ought not to be possible to repeat the
errors of the Therac‐25 project (see Section 3.6.1).
7.6

Knowledge Management Process

7.6.1 Overview
7.6.1.1 Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,
The purpose of the Knowledge Management process is
to create the capability and assets that enable the organi­
zation to exploit opportunities to re‐apply existing
knowledge.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Knowledge Management Process

7.6.1.2 Description KM is a broad area that transcends
the bounds of SE and project management, and there are a
number of professional societies that focus on it. KM
includes the identification, capture, creation, representa­
tion, dissemination, and exchange of knowledge across
targeted groups of stakeholders. It draws from the insights
and experiences of individuals and/or organizational
groups. The knowledge includes both explicit knowledge
(conscious realization of the knowledge, often docu­
mented and easily communicated) and tacit knowledge
(internalized in an individual without conscious realiza­
tion) and can come from either individuals (through expe­
rience) or organizations (through processes, practices, and
lessons learned) (Alavi and Leidner, 1999; Roedler, 2010).
Within an organization, explicit knowledge is usually
captured in its training, processes, practices, methods, pol­
icies, and procedures. In contrast, tacit knowledge is
embodied in the individuals of the organization and requires
specialized techniques to identify and capture the knowledge,
if it is to be passed along within the organization.
KM efforts typically focus on organizational objectives
such as improved performance, competitive advantage,
innovation, the sharing of lessons learned, integration, and
continuous improvement of the organization (Gupta and
Sharma, 2004). So it is generally advantageous for an
organization to adopt a KM approach that includes
building the framework, assets, and infrastructure to
support the KM.
The motivation for putting KM in place includes:
•• Information sharing across the organization
•• Reducing redundant work due to not having the
information needed at the right time
•• Avoiding “reinventing the wheel”
•• Facilitating training, focusing on best practices
•• Capturing knowledge that would “go out the door”
with retirements and attrition
The last item in this list is a major concern as we see a
negative slope in the supply of systems engineers. As the
percentage of experienced systems engineers retiring is
increasing, it becomes even more important to capture
the tacit knowledge that otherwise could be lost and then
make that knowledge available to the developing sys­
tems engineers.
In this handbook, KM is viewed from an organizational
project‐enabling perspective, that is, how the organization

159

supports the program or project environment with the
resources in its KM system. The support provided to the
project can come in several ways, including:
•• Knowledge captured from technical experts
•• Lessons learned captured from previous similar
projects
•• Domain engineering information that is applicable
for reuse on the project, such as part of a product
line or family of systems
•• Architecture or design patterns that are commonly
encountered
•• Other reusable assets that may be applicable to the
SOI
Figure 7.7 is the IPO diagram for the knowledge
management process.
7.6.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
knowledge management process are listed in Figure 7.7.
Descriptions of each input and output are provided in
Appendix E.
7.6.1.4 Process Activities The knowledge manage­
ment process includes the following activities:
•• Plan knowledge management.
–– Establish a KM strategy that defines how the
organization and projects within the organization
will interact to ensure the right level of knowledge
is captured to provide useful knowledge assets.
This needs to be done in a cost‐effective manner,
so there is a need to prioritize the efforts.
–– Establish the scope of the KM strategy—the
organization and projects need to identify the
specific knowledge information to capture and
manage.
–– Establish which projects will be subject to the
knowledge management process. If the
knowledge assets are not used, then the effort has
been wasted. If there is no identified project that
will benefit from the knowledge asset, then it
probably should not be considered.
•• Share knowledge and skills throughout the
organization.
–– Capture, maintain, and share knowledge and skills
per the strategy.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

160

Organizational Project‐Enabling Processes

Controls

Inputs

Activities

Outputs

Organization strategic plan
Organization lessons
learned
Project lessons learned
Records

Plan knowledge
management
Share knowledge and skills
throughout the
organization
Share knowledge assets
throughout the
organization
Manage knowledge, skills,
and knowledge assets

knowledge management
plan
knowledge management
system
knowledge management
report

Enablers
Figure 7.7 IPO diagram for the knowledge management process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and Walden.
Usage per the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

–– The infrastructure should be established to
include mechanisms to easily identify and access
the assets and to determine the level of applica­
bility for the project considering its use.
•• Share knowledge assets throughout the organization.
–– Establish a taxonomy for the reapplication of
knowledge.
–– Establish a representation for domain models
and domain architectures. The intent of this is to
ensure an understanding of the domain to help
identify and manage opportunities for common
system elements and their representations, such
as architecture or design patterns, reference
architectures, common requirements, etc.
–– Define or acquire the knowledge assets applicable
to the domain, including system and software ele­
ments, and share them across the organization. As
the system and system elements are defined in the
technical processes, the information items that
represent those definitions should be captured and
included as knowledge assets for the domain.
•• Manage knowledge, skills, and knowledge assets.
–– As the domain, family of systems, or product line
changes, ensure the associated knowledge assets
are revised or replaced to reflect the latest

information. In addition, the associated domain
models and architectures also may need to be
revised.
–– Assess and track where the knowledge assets are
being used. This can help understand the utility
of specific assets, as well as determine whether
they are being applied where they are applicable.
–– Determine whether the knowledge assets reflect
the advances in technology, where applicable,
and if they continue to evolve with the market
trends and needs.
Common approaches and tips:
•• The planning for KM may include:
–– Plans for obtaining and maintaining knowledge
assets for their useful life
–– Characterization of the types of assets to be col­
lected and maintained along with a scheme to
classify them for the convenience of users
–– Criteria for accepting, qualifying, and retiring
knowledge assets
–– Procedures for controlling changes to the
knowledge assets
–– A mechanism for knowledge asset storage and
retrieval

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Knowledge Management Process

•• In developing an understanding of the domain, it is
important to identify and manage both the common­
alities (such as features, capabilities, or functions)
and the differences or variations of the system ele­
ments (including where a common system element
has variations in parameters depending on the
system instance). The domain representations
should include:
–– Definition of the boundaries
–– Relationships of the domains to other domains
–– Domain models that incorporate the commonal­
ities and differences allowing for sensitivity
analysis across the range of variation
–– An architecture for a family of systems or prod­
uct line within the domain, including their com­
monalities and variations
7.6.2

Elaboration

7.6.2.1 General KM Implementation Since KM
focuses on capturing the organizational, project, and
individual knowledge for use throughout the organiza­
tion in the future, it is important to capture end‐of‐project
lessons learned prior to the project personnel moving on
to new assignment. An effective knowledge management
process has the knowledge capture mechanisms in place
to capture the relevant information throughout the life of
the project rather than trying to piece it together at the
end. This includes identification of systems that are part
of a product line or family of systems and system ele­
ments that are designed for reuse. For the first instance of
these systems and system elements, the KM system
needs to capture the domain engineering artifacts in a
way to facilitate their use in the future. For subsequent
instances, the KM system needs to provide the domain
engineering information and capture any variations,
updates of technology, and lessons learned. Issues impor­
tant to the organization:
•• Definition and planning of KM activities for domain
engineering and asset preservation, including tasks
dedicated to domain engineering of product lines or
families of systems and to the preservation of reus­
able assets.
•• Integration of architecture management into the
KM system including frameworks, architecture reuse,
architecture reference models, architecture patterns,

161

platform‐based engineering, and product line
architecture.
•• Characterization of the types of assets to be col­
lected and maintained including an effective means
for users to find the applicable assets
•• Determination of the quality and validity of the assets
7.6.2.2 Potential Reuse Issues There are serious
traps in reuse, especially with respect to COTS and non­
developmental item (NDI) elements:
•• Are the new system or system element require­
ments and operational characteristics exactly like
the prior one? Trap: the prior solution was intended
for a different use, environment, or performance
level, or it was a concept only that was never built.
•• Did the prior system or system element work cor­
rectly? Trap: it worked perfectly, but the new appli­
cation is outside the qualified range (e.g., using a
standard car for a high‐speed track race).
•• Is the new system or system element to operate in
the same environment as the prior one? Trap: it is
not certain, but there is no time to study it. One
NASA Mars probe was lost because the development
team used a radiator design exactly as was used on
a successful satellite in Earth orbit. When the Mars
mission failed, the team then realized that Earth
orbiting environment, while in space, is different
from a deep space mission.
•• Is the system/system element definition defined
and understood (i.e., requirements, constraints,
operating scenarios, etc.)? Trap: too often, the
development team assumes that if a reuse solution
will be applied (especially for COTS), there is no
need for well‐defined system definition. The issues
may not show up until systems integration, causing
major cost and schedule perturbations.
•• Is the solution likely to have emergent require­
ments/behaviors where the reuse is being consid­
ered? Trap: a solution that worked in the past was
used without consideration for the evolution of the
solution. If COTS is used, there may be no way to
adapt or modify it for the emergent requirements.
A properly functioning KM system paired with well‐
defined processes and engineering discipline can help
avoid these problems.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

8
Tailoring process and application
of systems engineering

Standards and handbooks address life cycle models and
systems engineering (SE) processes that may or may not
fully apply to a given organization and/or project. Most
are accompanied by a recommendation to adapt them to
the situation at hand.
The principle behind tailoring is to ensure that the
process meets the needs of the project while being scaled
to the level of rigor that allows the system life cycle
activities to be performed with an acceptable level of
risk. Tailoring scales the rigorous application to an
appropriate level based on need. The life cycle model
may be tailored as described in Chapter 3. Processes may
be tailored as described in this section. All processes
apply to all stages, tailoring determines the process level
that applies to each stage, and that level is never zero.
There is always some activity in each process in each
stage.
Figure 8.1 is a notional graph for balancing formal
process against the risk of cost and schedule overruns
(Salter, 2003). Insufficient SE effort is generally accom­
panied by high risk. However, as illustrated in Figure 8.1,
too much formal process also introduces high risk. If too

much rigor or unnecessary process activities or tasks are
performed, increased cost and schedule impacts will
occur with little or no added value. Tailoring occurs
dynamically over the system life cycle depending on risk
and the situational environment and should be continu­
ally monitored and adjusted as needed.
For ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288, process tailoring is the
deleting or adapting the processes to satisfy particular
circumstances or factors of the organization or project
using the process. While ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288 tailoring
focuses on the deletion of unnecessary or unwarranted
process elements, it does allow for additions and modifi­
cations as well.
This chapter describes the process of tailoring the life
cycle models and SE processes to meet organization and
project needs. Refer to ISO/IEC TR 24748‐1 (2010) and
ISO/IEC TR 24748‐2 (2010) for more information on
adaptation and tailoring. This chapter also describes the
application of the SE processes in various product sec­
tors and domains, for product lines, for services, for
enterprises, and in very small and micro enterprises
(VSMEs).

INCOSE Systems Engineering Handbook: A Guide for System Life Cycle Processes and Activities, Fourth Edition.
Edited by David D. Walden, Garry J. Roedler, Kevin J. Forsberg, R. Douglas Hamelin and Thomas M. Shortell.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

162

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

am

oun

t of ta iloring

m
co
pr
st
od
uc
t/s
yst
em
inte
grit
y

to t

he

ce

ss

t of
Cos

ing
rm
o
f
per

SE
al
m
r
fo

163

Formal systems engineering process followed

a
gr
ro
t/p
jec
Pro

ct

pro

ss

re

pr
oc
e

C

or

o
et
du
ks
ris

No or ad hoc systems engineering applied

e
dul
sche
Cost/

Risk of schedule and cost overruns

Tailoring Process

Degree of formal systems engineering process used on the project
Figure 8.1 Tailoring requires balance between risk and process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Michael Krueger,
adapted from Ken Salter. Usage per the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

8.1

Tailoring Process

8.1.1
8.1.1.1

Overview
Purpose As stated in ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288,

[A.2.1] The purpose of the Tailoring process is to adapt
the processes of [ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288] to satisfy
particular circumstances or factors.

8.1.1.2 Description At the organization level, the tai­
loring process adapts external standards in the context of
the organizational processes to meet the needs of the
organization. At the project level, the tailoring process
adapts organizational processes for the unique needs of
the project. Figure 8.2 is the IPO diagram for the tai­
loring process.
8.1.1.3 Inputs/Outputs Inputs and outputs for the
tailoring process are listed in Figure 8.2. Descriptions of
each input and output are provided in Appendix E.
8.1.1.4 Process Activities The tailoring process
includes the following activities:

•• Identify and record the circumstances that influence
tailoring.
–– Identify tailoring criteria for each stage—
Establish the criteria to determine the process
level that applies to each stage.
•• Take due account of the life cycle structures recommended or mandated by standards.
•• Obtain input from parties affected by the tailoring
decisions.
–– Determine process relevance to cost, schedule,
and risks.
–– Determine process relevance to system integrity.
–– Determine quality of documentation needed.
–– Determine the extent of review, coordination,
and decision methods.
•• Make tailoring decisions.
•• Select the life cycle processes that require
tailoring.
–– Determine other changes needed for the process
to meet organizational or project needs beyond
the tailoring (e.g., additional outcomes, activities,
or tasks).

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

164

Tailoring process and application of systems engineering

Controls

Inputs

Activities

Outputs

Organization strategic plan
Life cycle models

Identity and record the
circumstances that
influence tailoring
Take due account of the
life cycle structures
recommended or
mandated by standards
Obtain input from parties
affected by the tailoring
decisions
Make tailoring decisions
Select life cycle processes
that require tailoring

Organization tailoring
strategy
Project tailoring strategy

Enablers
Figure 8.2 IPO diagram for the tailoring process. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Shortell and Walden. Usage per the
INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

Common approaches and tips:
•• Eliminate unnecessary outcomes, activities, and
tasks, and add additional ones.
•• Base decisions on facts and obtain approval from an
independent authority.
•• Use the decision management process to assist in
tailoring decisions.
•• Conduct tailoring at least once for each stage.
•• Drive the tailoring based on the environment of the
system life cycle stages.
•• Constrain the tailoring based on agreements between
organizations.
•• Control the extent of tailoring based on issues of
compliance to stakeholder, customer, and organiza­
tion policies, objectives, and legal requirements.
•• Influence the extent of tailoring of the agreement
process activities based on the methods of procure­
ment or intellectual property.
•• Remove extra activities as the level of trust builds
between parties.

•• Identify a set of formal processes and outcomes/
activities/tasks at the end of the tailoring process.
This includes but is not limited to:
–– A documented set of tailored processes
–– Identification of the system documentation required
–– Identified reviews
–– Decision methods and criteria
–– The analysis approach to be used
•• Identify the assumptions and criteria for tailoring
throughout the life cycle to optimize the use of
formal processes.
8.1.2

Elaboration

8.1.2.1 Organizational Tailoring
When contemplating if and how to incorporate a new or
updated external standard into an organization, the fol­
lowing should be considered (Walden, 2007):
•• Understand the organization.
•• Understand the new standard.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Tailoring for Specific Product Sector or Domain Application

•• Adapt the standard to the organization (not vice versa).
•• Institutionalize standards compliance at the “right” level.
•• Allow for tailoring.
8.1.2.2 Project Tailoring Project tailoring applies
specifically to the work executed through programs and
projects. Factors that influence tailoring at the project
level include:
•• Stakeholders and customers (e.g., number of stake­
holders, quality of working relationships, etc.)
•• Project budget, schedule, and requirements
•• Risk tolerance
•• Complexity and precedence of the system
Today’s systems are more often jointly developed by
many different organizations. Cooperation must tran­
scend the boundaries of any one organization. Harmony
between multiple suppliers is often best maintained by
agreeing to follow a set of consistent processes and stan­
dards. Consensus on a set of practices is helpful but adds
complexity to the tailoring process.
8.1.2.3 Traps in Tailoring Common traps in the t­ ailor­ing
process include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Reuse of a tailored baseline from another system
without repeating the tailoring process
2. Using all processes and activities “just to be safe”
3. Using a preestablished tailored baseline
4. Failure to include relevant stakeholders

8.2 Tailoring for Specific Product
Sector or Domain Application
The discipline of SE can be applied on any size and type of
system. However, that does not mean that it should be
blindly applied in the same fashion on every system. While
the same SE fundamentals apply, different domains require
different points of emphasis in order to be successful.
This section provides a starting point for people
looking to apply SE in different domains. An objective of
this section is to provide guidance on how to introduce
the concepts of SE to a new field. As an example, the

165

audience for this guidance might be SE champions that
already work in the field and want to promote SE.
The domains are listed in alphabetical order and
should not be considered to be exhaustive. In addition,
one needs to recognize the evolving maturity of SE in
these applications. The following descriptions capture
the current state of the practice and may not necessarily
be representative of the state of practice at the time this
handbook is being read/used.
8.2.1 Automotive Systems
SE has been traditionally applied with success by indus­
tries that develop and sell large complex systems, with a
relatively long life cycle and small production volumes.
In contrast, the automotive industry has manufactured
high volumes of consumer products with a great diver­
sity for more than 120 years, with quite a success. A
highly cost‐driven industry, the automotive sector is
characterized by a permanent quest for cost‐efficiency
and massive reuse of parts and engineering artifacts.
Modern commercial automobiles have become com­
plex, high‐technology products in a relatively short time
span. The complexity drivers usually pointed out by the
actors of the industry are:
•• The increasing number of vehicle functionalities
supported by software, electronics, and mecha­
tronic technologies
•• Increasing safety constraints
•• Increasing environmental constraints, such as air
pollution and decreasing fossil fuel stocks, leading
to a partial or total electrification of the vehicle
power train
•• Globalization and the car market growth in emerg­
ing countries, which induce greater variations in the
product definition and a different repartition of
worldwide production of vehicles
•• New trends such as “advanced mobility services,”
“smart cities and smart transportation systems,” and
autonomous vehicles, which induce changes in the
purpose and scope of the traditional automobile
product
Most engineering specialties and domain specific practices
involved in the automotive industry follow international

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

166

Tailoring process and application of systems engineering

Table 8.1

Standardization‐related associations and automotive standards

Organization/standard

Description

SAE International, formerly the
Society of Automotive Engineers

One of the main organizations that coordinate the development of technical standards
for the automotive industry. Currently, SAE International is a globally active
professional association and standards organization for engineering professionals in
various industries, whose principal emphasis is placed on transport industries such as
automotive, aerospace, and commercial vehicles
An organization that sets automotive standards in Japan, analogous to the SAE
International
An incorporated association under German law whose members are primarily
international car manufacturers, suppliers, and engineering service providers from
the automotive industry. The ASAM standards define protocols, data models, file
formats, and application programming interfaces (APIs) for the use in the
development and testing of automotive electronic control units
An open and standardized automotive software architecture, jointly developed by
automobile manufacturers, suppliers, and tool developers. Some of its key goals
include the standardization of basic system functions, scalability to different vehicle
and platform variants, transferability throughout the network, integration from
multiple suppliers, maintainability
A nonprofit consortium whose goal is to establish a globally competitive, Linux‐based
operating system, middleware, and platform for the automotive in‐vehicle
infotainment (IVI) industry. GENIVI specifications cover the entire product life
cycle and software updates and upgrades over the vehicle’s lifetime
An international standard for particular requirements for the application of ISO 9001
quality management systems for automotive production and relevant service part
organizations
An international standard for set of electrical connectors and charging modes for
electric vehicles maintained by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC)

Japan Society of Automotive
Engineers (JSAE)
Association for Standardization of
Automation and Measuring
Systems (ASAM)

AUTomotive Open System
ARchitecture (AUTOSAR)

The GENIVI Alliance

ISO/TS 16949

IEC 62196

standards. Some important automotive‐related standards,
associations, and SE standards are shown in Table 8.1.
These standards usually define characteristics, measure­
ment procedures, or testing procedures for specific
vehicle systems or specific aspects of the product and
are often adapted to establish regulations by local
authorities.
Automotive standards are normally used for product
qualification or “certification” purposes, although it
should be noted that certification procedures in the auto­
motive industry differ greatly from those applied in other
sectors, like aerospace. Usually, the scope of these stan­
dards is either the product or the manufacturing process,
with specific regulations ruling each vehicle system. One
remarkable exception to this type of standards is the
functional safety standard ISO 26262 (2011), which
defines activities and work products covering a full
“safety life cycle” and allowing a systematic and trace­
able mastery of safety risks.

SE as a discipline started to develop rather recently in
some automotive organizations, around the mid‐1990s or
early 2000s, mainly as a response to the aforementioned
challenges. While the organizations that have shown
interested in SE agree that most of these challenges
could be leveraged by applying a systems approach, SE
is not yet a standard practice in the industry.
The application of SE is not mandatory in the auto­
motive industry to develop and sell products. The cultural
and organizational changes that are required for an effec­
tive global industry‐wide implementation of SE are
beginning to take place.
The automotive industry is characterized by an exten­
sive reuse of legacy engineering artifacts (requirements,
architectures, validation plans) and system constituents
(systems, system elements, parts) and by the management
of huge product lines (at vehicle, system, and part levels),
with high stakes associated to the efficient management
of those product lines.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Tailoring for Specific Product Sector or Domain Application

When applying SE in the automotive industry, one
should take into consideration these specificities. An
adapted SE process for the automotive domain should
then be an ideal combination of product‐driven and
stakeholder‐/requirement‐driven approaches. The weight
of the former type of approach will be more important
for “classical” vehicle systems and based on typical var­
iant management techniques (product derivation or con­
figuring), while the relative weight of the second type of
approach will be more important for innovative systems
and “untraditional” vehicle scopes or usages.
In particular, when implementing the SE technical
processes for the first time, the importance of upstream
SE activities (e.g., operational analysis and requirement
elaboration) must be underlined. Ideally, these activities
should take place off‐line, that is, “disconnected” from
the development of the product, so that the produced SE
artifacts baselines are properly defined and verified.
Since the involvement of carmakers in the development
the different vehicle systems differs from one car maker
to the other and from one vehicle domain to the other,
care should also be taken in the tailoring of agreement
processes, which will depend on the particular project
context. The formalization of the exchanges between the
Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) and their pro­
viders during the lifetime of a project should help tai­
loring these processes and could set the groundwork for
their future standardization.
8.2.2

Biomedical and Healthcare Systems

SE has come to be recognized as a major contributor to
biomedical and healthcare product and development,
particularly due to the need for architectural soundness,
requirements traceability, and subdisciplines such as
safety, reliability, and human factors engineering.
Biomedical and healthcare systems range from low com­
plexity to high complexity. They also range from low
risk to high risk. Many of these systems must work in
harsh environments, including inside the human body.
SE within the biomedical and healthcare environment
may not be as mature as the defense and aerospace
domain, for example, but the growing complexity of
medical devices, their connectivity, and their use envi­
ronment is quickly increasing the breadth and depth of
the practice. Standards such as ISO 14971 (application
of risk management to medical devices) and IEC 60601
(medical device safety) are driving organizations to take

167

a deeper look into safety and the engineering practices
behind it. Other government standards and regulations
such as the US Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Title
21 Part 820 (medical devices/quality system regulations)
shape the development process for medical devices sold
therein. Thus, systems engineers are increasingly being
brought on board to leverage their life cycle management
skills and validate that the final product does indeed
meet the needs of its stakeholders.
In the biomedical and healthcare environment, it is
important to understand that risk management is gener­
ally centered around user safety rather than technical or
business risks and that traceability is often a key factor in
regulatory audits. Organizations that have strong SE
practices are therefore in a better position to avoid
development pitfalls and to effectively defend their
design decisions if a regulatory audit does occur. Going
forward, biomedical and healthcare organizations that
effectively leverage SE standards such as ISO/IEC/IEEE
15288 and ISO 29148 will be in a much better position
to develop safe and effective products. In general, such
standards do not need to be excessively tailored, although
firms with new or maturing practices may want to focus
on lean implementations in order to obtain early and
effective adoption.
8.2.3

Defense and Aerospace Systems

While SE has been practiced in some form from antiq­
uity, what has now become known as the modern defini­
tion of SE has its roots in defense and aerospace systems
of the twentieth century. It has been recognized as a dis­
tinct activity in the late 1950s and early 1960s as a result
of the technological advances taking place that led to
increasing levels of system complexity and systems
integration challenges. The need for SE increased with
the large‐scale introduction of digital computers and
software. Defense and aerospace evolved to address
systemic approaches to issues such as the widespread
adaptation of COTS technologies and the use of system‐
of‐system (SoS) approaches.
Defense and aerospace systems are characterized as
complex technical systems with many stakeholders and
compressed development timelines. The systems must
also be highly available and work in extreme conditions
all over the world—from deserts to rain forests and to
arctic outposts. Defense and aerospace systems are also
characterized by long system life cycles, so logistics is of

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

168

Tailoring process and application of systems engineering

prime importance. Most defense and aerospace systems
have a strong human interaction, so usability/human sys­
tems integration is critical for successful operations.
Since SE has a strong heritage in defense and
aerospace, much of the SE processes in this handbook
can be used as is in a straightforward manner, with just
the normal project tailoring for the unique aspects of the
project. It is important to note that as ISO/IEC/IEEE
15288 has evolved into a more domain‐ and country‐
neutral SE standard, some care must be taken to ensure
that the defense and aerospace focus is reasserted upon
application. The defense organizations of many coun­
tries have specific policies, standards, and guidebooks to
guide the application of SE in their environment.
8.2.4

Infrastructure Systems

Infrastructure systems are significant physical structures
used for commodity transfer (e.g., roads, bridges, rail­
roads, mass transit, and electricity, water, wastewater,
and oil and gas distribution) or are major industrial plants
(e.g., oil and gas platforms, refineries, mines, smelters,
nuclear reprocessing, water and wastewater treatment,
and steelworks). The domain is multidisciplinary, vast
and diverse, and characterized by large‐scale projects
often with loosely defined boundaries, evolving system
architectures, long implementation (which can exceed a
few decades) and asset life periods, and multiphase life
cycles. Infrastructure systems are distinguished from
manufacturing and production by most often being one‐
off, large objects and where construction takes place on
a site rather than in a factory.
Infrastructure projects tend to exhibit a degree of
uniqueness, complexity, and cost uncertainty. A
significant proportion of time and cost is spent during
the construction stage. These difficulties are exacerbated
by changes in project environments (economical,
political, legislative, technological, etc.) and hence to the
stakeholders’ expectations and design solutions that take
place over an extended period of time.
Unlike other SE domains, most infrastructure projects
cannot be standardized and do not involve a prototype. In
addition, significant external interfaces exist, and fail­
ures in one element may cascade to other elements. For
example, falling debris from the World Trade Center
attack damaged the water system and flooded the New
York Stock Exchange, resulting in severe impacts to an
interconnected system of infrastructure systems.

Within infrastructure, many of the engineering
d­ isciplines (e.g., civil, structural, mechanical, chemical,
process, and electrical) have well‐established, traditional
practices and are guided by industry codes and s­ tandards.
SE practices are more developed in the high‐technology
subsystems that involve software development (e.g.,
modern communications‐based train control systems,
intelligent transportation systems, telemetry and process
control) and particularly in industries where system
safety is paramount.
The benefit of SE to the infrastructure domain lies in
the structured approach to delivering and operating a
multidisciplinary, integrated, and configurable system
and needs to align with the associated project manage­
ment and asset management practices. Many of the
processes described in this handbook are being employed
to handle that complexity but using a different termi­
nology. The “Guide for the Application of Systems
Engineering in Large Infrastructure Projects” (INCOSE‐
TP‐2010‐007‐01, 2012) emphasizes the relationship bet­
ween system, work, and organizational breakdown
structures and the importance of good configuration
management, not only through the project life cycle but
during the whole asset lifetime. These items and the
interactions between them are determined by a multitude
of constraints, with the physical structure of the object
and access being the most obvious but also many others,
such as availability of suitable contractors and of man­
power and machines, fabrication and shipping durations,
and ones arising from the environment in which the
construction takes place.
Infrastructure projects tend to quickly define the
high‐level design solution (e.g., a high‐speed railway or
nuclear power plant), and therefore, the greatest benefit
of applying SE principles is gained in the systems
integration and construction stage. Careful analysis to
identify all the potentially affected organizations, struc­
tures, systems, people, and processes is required to
ensure proposed changes will not adversely impact other
areas and will lead to the required outcome.
The domain could benefit from better organization
and integration of activities leading into the construction
stage of the project life cycle. This would help manage
the risks and uncertainty associated with cost estimating
and changing scope and could improve construction pro­
ductivity, hence making the industry more cost‐effective.
SE efforts tailored to meet the uniqueness characterized
by infrastructure projects control the project’s internal

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Tailoring for Specific Product Sector or Domain Application

and external dynamics (including uncertainty caused by
natural events) and consider the project and postproject
conditions will allow the domain to respond to the unique
challenges it faces due to its broad, diverse, unique, and
unpredictable makeup.
The documentation of infrastructure processes is
largely company and project specific, although based on
general standards, such as the ISO 9000/10000 series
(quality management), ISO 10845 (construction pro­
curement), and ISO 12006 (organization of information
about construction works), as well as various national
and international standards for the contractual (legal)
framework in which a construction project is embedded.
The choice of contractual framework and the allocation
of liability and commercial risk is a major factor in
designing the construction process.
8.2.5

Space Systems

Space systems are those systems that leave the Earth’s
atmosphere or are closely associated with their support
and deployment. Due to the extremely high costs and
physical exertion of deploying assets into Earth orbit or
beyond, space systems typically require high reliability
with no maintenance other than software changes. This
makes it necessary for all system elements to work the
first time or be compensated by complex operational
workarounds.
SE was developed in large part due to the demands of
the space race and associated defense technologies such
as ballistic missiles. The discipline is very mature in this
domain and does not require adaptation.
Key emphases of SE in the space domain are valida­
tion and verification, testing, and integration of highly
reliable, well‐characterized systems. Risk management
is also key in determining when to incorporate new tech­
nologies and how to react to changing requirements
through multiyear developments and programmatic
challenges. The traditional SE Vee approach has its basis
in space systems, as they are typically relatively new
designs conceived, built, and deployed by agencies or
prime contractors. Declining budgets are making the
unity of vision less common as consortia and partner­
ships are made to pool resources.
A large number of standards are used in the space
domain. Telecommunications is a major source, since
spectra and noninterference must be negotiated on a
global basis. Electrical and data standards are also used

169

in many parts of both in‐space and ground support
­systems. National space agencies and militaries often set
standards as well (e.g., the European Cooperation for
Space Standardization, US “MIL” Standards). An excel­
lent example of a space‐based SE handbook is freely
available from the NASA (2007b). As space ­systems are
deployed by more countries, standardization via ISO and
IEEE is becoming more common for an increasing set of
interoperability issues.
8.2.6

(Ground) Transportation Systems

The use of SE has emerged as the standard approach for
complex capital programs in the fields of aerospace
engineering, defense, and information technology. In the
transportation industry, however, the assimilation of SE
principles and methods has grown more slowly. The his­
torical orientation of most transportation agencies has
been to structure capital projects by engineering disciple
and adopt low‐bid procurement methods.
However, in the past few decades, the use of SE in
transportation has been growing, with several progres­
sive transit agencies (including London Underground
and Network Rail in the United Kingdom, ProRail in
the Netherlands, New York City Transit in the United
States, and the Land Transport Authority in Singapore)
having established SE departments and many others
beginning to embed SE principles into their capital
programs.
Emerging experience from these agencies suggests
the following aspects are most relevant to consider when
applying and tailoring SE principles to the transportation
domain:
•• Recognize the single‐discipline tendency—the his­
torical orientation in transportation agencies is to
organize projects by engineering discipline. This
can generate disciplinary silos that flow from early
engineering through procurement and into system
design, build, and test. SE must work across these
silos, which can introduce tension to organizations
used to working in the traditional way.
•• Working with in‐service SoS—many transportation
systems are large, distributed, in‐service SoS. This
means that transportation SE work is often focused
on systems upgrade and must work with and around
the existing operation while still maintaining appro­
priate levels of public service.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

170

Tailoring process and application of systems engineering

•• Delivering socioeconomic benefits are often the key
driver, yet the operator has an important role—
transportation systems primarily existing to provide
socioeconomic benefits to the public. The key drivers
for many transportation agencies are therefore often
focused on improving customer experience and
public safety. However, care should be taken to also
focus on operational benefits, and operability and
maintainability should be considered throughout.
•• Demonstrating the value of SE—many transporta­
tion agencies have a historic divide between capital
delivery and operations that persists into today’s
organizations. Project managers face cost and
schedule pressure to deliver quickly, and this can
sometimes generate opposition from those who
perceive that the emphasis SE places on early‐phase
analysis injects delay into the project manager’s
schedule, while the benefits accrued from the anal­
ysis are felt most strongly by the operational stake­
holders who are outside of the project manager’s
immediate organization.
•• Considering the commercial and public pressures—
there is increasing dependence on private investment
to fund the larger transportation infrastructure pro­
jects, which increases the demand for a faster return
on investment (ROI), which in turn places greater
restrictions on time available to explore the problem
space. Furthermore, while the desire to select to a
jump to technology solution is endemic in many

sectors, many transportation agencies face acute
pressure from the public, the media, and politicians
to demonstrate early signs of progress in terms that
internal and external stakeholders understand—
typically in specifics of technology. These pres­
sures can sometimes negatively influence an
agency’s ability to apply SE to its projects.

8.3 Application of Systems
Engineering for Product
Line Management
Product line management (PLM) is a combination of
product, process, management, and organization to
migrate from single‐system engineering to a product
line approach. PLM can support the goal of improved
organizational competitiveness as it decreases the
development cost, increases the quality, and enlarges the
product catalog.
For the customer, a product line approach allows an
organization to offer a family of products, which are
adapted to the customer. This can lead to optimization
of the product or service, the cost and time of acquisi­
tion, the quality of the system, and the cost of owner­
ship. For the organization, PLM leads to optimization of
its commercial position and its industrial loads, ­usually
highlighting the identical functionality leading to stan­
dardization. These relationships are shown in Figure 8.3.

Customer
Peugeot 407

Organization

Citroen CS

Peugeot 407SW

Product line
Figure 8.3

Product line viewpoints. Reprinted with permission from Alain Le Put. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Application of Systems Engineering for Services

Domain
system engineering

Application
system engineering
Reuse

Product
line
management

Capitalization
Figure 8.4 Capitalization and reuse in a product line.
Reprinted with permission from Alain Le Put. All other rights
reserved.

When implementing PLM, both the domain and the
application SE processes must change as shown in
Figure 8.4. The domain products (or generic products)
address the product line requirements and are the results
of domain SE. The generic products produced by the
domain SE activities are capitalized from the application
artifacts (e.g., generic requirements, generic architecture,
and generic tests). These artifacts may be common or
variable. The application products are the results of
application SE. These products are the result of the
instantiation of the generic products (i.e., reuse).
8.3.1

Product Line Scoping

Product line scoping defines the main features of the
product line, which provide sufficient reuse potential to
justify the setting up or the evolution of a product line
organization. Product line scoping is mainly based on:
•• The market analysis: target the perimeter of the
concerned product line and the main external fea­
tures of the product that provide enough commercial
potential.
•• The SE process assessment: process maturity,
weaknesses source of errors, and repetitive work
without greater added value. (For example, it is
even possible that some teams already have a pro­
cess akin to the product lines.)
•• The products analysis: product tree and the presence
of numerous common artifacts.

171

•• The industrial process analysis: production and
maintenance. (For example, the objective to be able
to produce in several plants can be source of
variability.)
•• The acquisition strategies analysis: the desire to
diversify suppliers and the need to integrate differ­
ent system elements (in size, performance, etc.).
•• The technology analysis: evaluation of technology
readiness levels, design maturity, and domain
applicability.
8.3.1.1 Return on Investment Developing a first
system in a product line is an investment. The initial
development is more expensive and longer than for a single‐
system development. But the following systems developed
in the same product line are less expensive and may be
delivered earlier (i.e., reduced time to market). In either
case, the ROI must be evaluated, measured and managed.
As illustrated in Figure 8.5 three projects are devel­
oped either in a single‐system engineering classical
approach (top part) or in a product line SE approach
(middle part). The ROI (bottom part) is initially negative
(e.g., investment phase) and then positive (benefits of the
product line approach). In this example, the break‐even
point is reached for the third project.

8.4 Application of Systems
Engineering for Services
This section introduces the concept of service SE, where
SE methodologies are adapted to include a disciplined,
systemic, and service‐oriented, customer‐centric approach
among different stakeholders and resources for near‐
real‐time value cocreation and service delivery. The
twenty‐first‐century technology‐intensive global ser­
vices economy can be characterized as “information
driven, customer‐centric, e‐oriented, and productivity
focused.” It requires transdisciplinary collaborations bet­
ween society, science, enterprises, and engineering
(Chang, 2010). Several researchers and businesses are
utilizing a socioeconomic and technological perspective
to investigate end‐user (customer) interactions with
enterprises by developing formal methodologies for
value cocreation and productivity improvements. These
methodologies have evolved into service SE, which
mandates a disciplined and systemic approach (service

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

172

Tailoring process and application of systems engineering

Single system development
P1
SE effort
for proposal
for development

P2
P3
Time

Product line development
SE effort
for proposal
for development

Overcost
and delay
Savings

P1
P2

Savings
and early
delivery

P3
Time
Investment (overcost)
Savings

30

Return on investment

20
10
0
– 10
– 20

Monthly savings
Monthly investment
Total savings (cum.)

– 30

Break even point

Total investment (cum.)
– 40

1

4

7

10

13

16

19

22

25

28

31

34

37

40

43

45

49

Time (months)
Figure 8.5 Product line return on investment. Reprinted with permission from Alain Le Put. All other rights reserved.

oriented, customer‐centric) among different stakeholders
and resources in the design and delivery of the service to
help customize and personalize service transactions to
meet particular customer needs (Hipel et al., 2007;
Maglio and Spohrer, 2008; Pineda et al., 2014; Tien and
Berg, 2003; Vargo and Akaka, 2009).
Service systems can be viewed as an SoS, where
individual, heterogeneous, functional systems are linked
together to realize new features/functionalities of a meta­
system and to improve robustness, lower cost, and
increase reliability. For service systems, understanding
the integration needs among loosely coupled systems
and system entities along with the information flows
required for both governance and operations, administra­
tion, maintenance, and provisioning (OAM&P) of the
service presents major challenges in the definition,
design, and implementation of services (Domingue et al.,

2009; Maier, 1998). Cloutier et al. (2009) presented the
importance of Network‐Centric Systems (NCS) for
dynamically binding different system entities in
engineered systems rapidly to realize adaptive SoS that,
in the case of service systems, are capable of knowledge
emergence and real‐time behavior emergence for service
discovery and delivery.
The typical industry example given of this progres­
sion toward services is the International Business
Machines (IBM), which still produces some hardware
but view their business as overwhelmingly service ori­
ented wherein hardware plays only an incidental role in
their business solutions services. Furthermore, Apple,
Amazon, Facebook, Twitter, eBay, Google, and other
application service providers have provided the
integrated access to people, media, services, and things
to enable new styles of societal and economic interactions

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Application of Systems Engineering for Services

at unprecedented scales, flexibility, and quality to allow
for mass collaboration and value cocreation. Several
researchers have concluded that even manufacturing
firms are more willing to produce “results,” rather than
solely products as specific artifacts by collaborating with
end users that can potentially help define such results
(Cook, 2004; Wild et al., 2007).
As the world becomes more widely interconnected
and people become better educated, the services net­
works (created by the interaction of the system entities)
will be accessible from anywhere, at any time, by anyone
with the proper access rights.
8.4.1

Fundamentals of Service

Services are activities that cause a transformation of the
state of an entity (a person, product, business, region, or
nation) by mutually agreed terms between the service
provider and the customer. Individual services are
relatively simple, although they may require customiza­
tion and significant backstage support (e.g., knowledge
management, logistics, decision analysis, forecasting)
to assure quality and timely delivery. A service system
enables a service and/or set of services to be accessible
to the customer (individual or enterprise) where
­stakeholders interact to create a particular service value
chain to be developed and delivered with a specific
objective (Spohrer and Maglio, 2010). In service sys­
tems practice, the service value chain is described in
terms of links among the system entities connected via
the NCS. A value proposition can be viewed as a request
from one service system to another to run an algorithm
(the value proposition) from the perspectives of multiple

173

stakeholders according to culturally determined value
principles (Spohrer, 2011). Spath and Fahnrich (2007)
defined a service metamodel comprising nine types of
system entities and their corresponding attributes as
shown in Table 8.2.
Thus, a service or service offering is created by the
relationships among service system entities (including
information flows) through business processes into stra­
tegic capabilities that consistently provide superior value
to the customer. From an SE perspective, participating
system entities dynamically configure four types of
resources: people, technology/environment infrastruc­
ture, organizations/institutions, and shared information/
symbolic knowledge in the service delivery process.
Systems are part of other systems that are often
expressed by system hierarchies (Skyttner, 2006) to cre­
ate a multilevel hierarchy. Thus, the service system is
composed of service system entities that interact through
processes defined by governance and management rules
to create different types of outcomes in the context of
stakeholders with the purpose of providing improved
customer interaction and value cocreation. This concept
can be extended to create the service system hierarchy
shown in Figure 8.6.
The fundamental attributes of a service system
include togetherness, structure, behavior, and emer­
gence. As mentioned earlier, today’s global economy is
very competitive, and the service system’s trajectory
should be well controlled as time goes by (Qiu, 2009)
since services are “real time in nature and are consumed
at the time they are co‐produced” (Tien and Berg, 2003),
that is, during service transactions. The service system
should evolve and adapt to the conditions within the

Table 8.2 Attributes of system entities
Entity type

Attributes

Customer
Goals
Inputs
Outputs
Processes

Features, attitudes, preferences, requirements
Business, service, customer
Physical, information, knowledge, constraints
Physical, information, knowledge, waste, customer satisfaction
Service provision, service delivery, service operations, service support, customer relationships,
planning and control
Service providers, support providers, management, owner organization, customer
Enterprise, organizations, buildings, equipment, enabling technologies at customer premises
(e.g., desktop 3D printers), furnishings, location, etc.
Information; knowledge; methods, processes, and tools (MPTs); decision support; skill acquisition
Political, economic, social, technological, environmental factors

Human enablers
Physical enablers
Informatics enablers
Environment

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

174

Tailoring process and application of systems engineering

Service
system
Service system
entities

Outcomes
(value change)

Interactions
(service networks)

Identity

Value proposition

Governance mechanism

Reputation

(aspirations/lifecycle/risks)

(offer/reconfig/incentives/risks)

(rules/constraints/penalties/risk)

(opportunities/variety/risks)

Access rights
(relationships)

Figure 8.6
reserved.

SLA
(ranking of entities)

Organization

Security
management

Service system conceptual framework. Reprinted with permission from Dr. James C. Spohrer. All other rights

business space in a manner to ensure that the customized
service behaves as expected. This adaptive behavior of
service system implies that its design must be truly
transdisciplinary and must include methodologies from
social science (e.g., sociology, psychology, and philos­
ophy) to natural science (mathematics, biology, etc.) to
management (e.g., organization, economics, and entre­
preneurship) (Hipel et al., 2007).
8.4.2

Service
management

Properties of Services

Services not only involve the interaction between the
service provider and the consumer to produce value
but have other intangible attributes like quality of ser­
vice (e.g., ambulance service availability and response
time to an emergency request). The demand for ser­
vice may have loads dependent on time of day, day of
week, season, or unexpected needs (e.g., natural
disasters, product promotion campaigns, holiday
season, etc.), and services are rendered at the time
they are requested. Thus, the design and operations of
service systems “is all about finding the appropriate
balance between the resources devoted to the systems
and the demands placed on the system, so that the
quality of service to the customer is as good as pos­
sible” (Daskin, 2010).
A service‐level agreement (SLA) represents the nego­
tiated service‐level requirements of the customer and
establishes valid and reliable service performance mea­
sures to ensure that service providers meet and maintain
the prescribed quality of service, user‐perceived performance,

and degree of satisfaction of the user. The service system’s
SLAs are then the composition of these categories evalu­
ated on a systemic level to ensure consistency, equity, and
sustainability of the service (Spohrer, 2011; Theilmann
and Baresi, 2009; Tien and Berg, 2003).
The twenty‐first century is witnessing accelerated
technology development and global mass collaboration
as an established mode of operation. Value cocreation is
achieved as loosely entangled actors or entities come
together in unprecedented ways to meet mutual and
broader market requirements.
This transformation will radically reshape the nature
of work, the boundaries of the enterprise, and the respon­
sibilities of business leaders (McAfee, 2009). Spohrer
(2011) has captured this trend in service by categorizing
the different service sectors into three types of service
systems:
•• Systems that focus on flow of things: transportation
and supply chain, water and waste recycling, food
and products, energy and electric grid, information,
and cloud.
•• Systems that focus on human activities and
development: buildings and construction, retail,
hospitality/media, entertainment, banking and
finance, business consulting, healthcare, family life,
education, work life/jobs, and entrepreneurship.
•• Systems that focus on governing (city, state, nation):
the classification helps in identifying different
objectives and constraints for the design and operations
of the service system (e.g., strategic policies under

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Application of Systems Engineering for Enterprises

limited budget, education, strategic readiness for
quick response, national defense, maximizing profit
while minimizing cost) and determining the overlap
and synergies required among different service
entities and required science disciplines.
8.4.3

Scope of Service SE

Current enterprises must plan, develop, and manage the
enhancements of their infrastructure, products, and ser­
vices, including marketing strategies to include product
and service offerings based on new, unexplored, or
unforeseen customer needs with clearly differentiated
value propositions. Taking the service SE approach is
imperative for the service‐oriented, customer‐centric,
holistic view to select and combine service system entities
to define and discover relationships among service system
entities to plan, design, adapt, or self‐adapt to cocreate
value. Major challenges faced by service SE include the
dynamic nature of service systems evolving and adapting
to constantly changing operations and/or business envi­
ronments and the need to overcome silos of knowledge.
Interoperability of service system entities through inter­
face agreements must be at the forefront of the service SE
design process for the harmonization of OAM&P proce­
dures of the individual service system entities (Pineda,
2010). In addition, service systems require open collabo­
ration among all stakeholders, but recent research on mental
models of multidisciplinary teams shows integration and
collaboration into cohesive teams has proven to be a major
challenge (Carpenter et al., 2010).
Interoperability among the different service system
entities becomes highly relevant in service SE since the
constituent entities are designed according to stake­
holder needs; the entity is usually managed and operated
to satisfy its own objectives independently of other
system entities. The objectives of individual service
system entities may not necessarily converge with the
overall objectives of the service system. Thus, the service system design process (SSDP) adapts traditional SE
life cycle best practices, as illustrated by Luzeaux and
Ruault (2010), Lin and Hsieh (2011), Lefever (2005),
and the Office of Government Commerce (2009).
Another important role of service SE is the
management of the service design process whose main
focus is to provide the planning, organizational structure,
collaboration environment, and program controls
required to ensure that stakeholder’s needs are met from
an end‐to‐end customer perspective. The service design

175

management process aligns business objectives and
business operational plans with end‐to‐end service
objectives including customer management plans, ser­
vice management and operations plans, and operations
technical plans (Hipel et al., 2007; Pineda et al., 2014).
8.4.4

Value of Service SE

Service SE brings a customer focus to promote service
excellence and to facilitate service innovation through
the use of emerging technologies to propose creation
of new service systems and value cocreation. Service
SE uses disciplined approaches to minimize risk by
coordinating/orchestrating social aspects, governance
(including security), environmental, human behavior,
business, customer care, service management, opera­
tions, and technology development processes. Service
systems engineers must play the role of an integrator,
considering the interface requirements for the interoper­
ability of service system entities—not only for technical
integration but also for the processes and organization
required for optimal customer experience during service
operations. The service design definition process
includes the definition of methods, processes, and proce­
dures necessary to monitor and track service require­
ments verification and validation as they relate to the
OAM&P procedures of the whole service system and its
entities. These procedures ensure that failures by any
entity are detected and do not propagate and disturb the
operations of the service (Luzeaux and Ruault, 2010).
The world’s economies continue to move toward the
creation and delivery of more innovative services. To best
prepare tomorrow’s leaders, new disciplines are needed
that include and ingrain different skills and create the
knowledge to support such global services. Service sys­
tems engineers fit the T‐shaped model of professionals
(Maglio and Spohrer, 2008) who must have a deeply
developed specialty area as well as a broad set of skills and
capabilities in addition to the service system management
and engineering skills, as summarized by Chang (2010).
8.5 Application of Systems
Engineering for Enterprises
This section illustrates the applications of SE principles in
enterprise SE for the planning, design, improvement, and
operation of an enterprise in order to transform and
continuously improve the enterprise to survive in a

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

176

Tailoring process and application of systems engineering

globally competitive environment. Enterprise SE is the
application of SE principles, concepts, and methods to the
planning, design, improvement, and operation of an
enterprise. Enterprise SE is an emerging discipline that
focuses on frameworks, tools, and problem‐solving
approaches for dealing with the inherent complexities of
the enterprise. Furthermore, enterprise SE addresses more
than just solving problems; it also deals with the exploita­
tion of opportunities for better ways to achieve the
enterprise goals. A good overall description of enterprise
SE is provided in the book by Rebovich and White (2011).
For more detailed information on this topic, please see the
enterprise SE articles in Part 4 of SEBoK (2014).
8.5.1

Enterprise

An enterprise consists of a purposeful combination (e.g.,
a network) of interdependent resources (e.g., people,
processes, organizations, supporting technologies, and
funding) that interact with each other to coordinate
functions, share information, allocate funding, create
workflows, and make decisions and their environment(s)
to achieve business and operational goals through a com­
plex web of interactions distributed across geography and
time (Rebovich and White, 2011).

Money

Time

Energy

Is an

Business

Depends on

Knowledge
People

Other
stakeholders

for

Value

Manages

Asset

Projects
Is type of

Tacit
knowledge

Society

Material

consumes/
Produces

Explicit
knowledge

An enterprise must do two things: (1) develop things
within the enterprise to serve as either external offerings
or as internal mechanisms to enable achievement of
enterprise operations and (2) transform the enterprise
itself so that it can most effectively and efficiently per­
form its operations and survive in its competitive and
constrained environment.
It is worth noting that an enterprise is not equivalent
to an “organization” according to the definition earlier.
This is a frequent misuse of the term enterprise.
Figure 8.7 shows that an enterprise includes not only
the organizations that participate in it but also people,
knowledge, and other assets such as processes, princi­
ples, policies, practices, doctrine, theories, beliefs, facil­
ities, land, intellectual property, and so on.
Giachetti (2010) distinguishes between enterprise and
organization by saying that an organization is a view of the
enterprise. The organization view defines the structure and
relationships of the organizational units, people, and other
actors in an enterprise. Using this definition, we would say
that all enterprises have some type of organization, whether
formal, informal, hierarchical, or self‐organizing network.
To enable more efficient and effective enterprise trans­
formation, the enterprise needs to be looked at “as a system,”
rather than merely as a collection of functions connected

Include
work
in

Creates
Is type of

Organization

Participates
in

Enterprise

Manages

Teams
Resource
Is type of

Includes/uses
all these things

Notes:
1. All entities shown are decomposable, except people. For example, a business can have sub businesses, a project can have subprojects,
a resource can have sub resources, an enterprise can have sub enterprises.
2. All entities have ether names. For example, a program can be a project comprising server all subprojects. (Often called merely projects).
Business can be an agency, team can be group, value can be utility, etc.
3. There is no attempt to be prescriptive in the names chosen for this diagram. The main goal of this is to show how this chapter uses these
terms and how they are related to each other in a conceptual manner.

Figure 8.7 Organizations manage resources to create enterprise value. From SEBoK (2014). Reprinted with permission from
BKCASE Editorial Board. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Application of Systems Engineering for Enterprises

solely by information systems and shared facilities (Rouse,
2009). While a system perspective is required for dealing
with the enterprise, this is rarely the task or responsibility of
people who call themselves ­systems engineers.
8.5.2

Since there could possibly be several organizations
involved in this enterprise venture, each organization
could be responsible for particular systems or perhaps
for certain kinds of elements. Each organization brings
their own organizational capability with them, and the
unique combination of these organizations leads to the
overall operational capability of the whole enterprise.
These concepts are also illustrated in Figure 8.7.
The word “capability” is used in SE in the sense of
“the ability to do something useful under a particular set
of conditions.” This section discusses three different kinds
of capabilities: organizational capability, system capa­
bility, and operational capability. It uses the word “com­
petence” to refer to the ability of people relative to the SE
task. Individual competence (sometimes called “compe­
tency”) contributes to, but is not the sole determinant of,
organizational capability. This competence is translated to
organizational capabilities through the work practices that
are adopted by the organizations. New systems (with new
or enhanced system capabilities) are developed to enhance
enterprise operational capability in response to stakehold­
er’s concerns about a problem situation.
As shown in Figure 8.8, operational capabilities pro­
vide operational services that are enabled by system

Creating Value

The primary purpose of an enterprise is to create value
for society, for other stakeholders, and for the organiza­
tions that participate in that enterprise. This is illustrated
in Figure 8.7, which shows all the key elements that con­
tribute to this value creation process.
There are three types of organizations of interest to an
enterprise: businesses, projects, and teams. A typical business
participates in multiple enterprises through its portfolio of
projects. Large SE projects can be enterprises in their own
right, with participation by many different businesses, and
may be organized as a number of subprojects.
8.5.3

177

Capabilities in the Enterprise

The enterprise acquires or develops systems or individual
elements of a system. The enterprise can also create,
supply, use, and operate systems or system elements.

Includes these kinds of “products”
Hardware, software, personnel,
facilities, techniques, data,
materials, services, etc.

Opportunity
potentials
Elements

work in

have

Individual
competence

Organization

has
enables

Conceives,
develops, creates,
operates,
supports,
decommissions,
upgrades

Organizational
capability

enables

wish to
improve

Addresses
Addresses

has

People

Problem
situation

System

has

Enterprise

Acquires,
supplies,
develops,
creates, uses,
operates, retires

System
capability

enables

has

Stakeholders
Define/
judge

has

Operational
capability

influences

Operational
value

provides
enables

Operational
services

provide

Figure 8.8 Individual competence leads to organizational, system, and operational capability. From SEBoK (2014). Reprinted
with permission from BKCASE Editorial Board. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

178

Tailoring process and application of systems engineering

capabilities. These system capabilities are inherent in the
system that is conceived, developed, created, and/or
operated by an enterprise. Enterprise SE concentrates its
efforts on maximizing operational value for various
stakeholders, some of whom may be interested in the
improvement of some problem situation.
Enterprise SE, however, addresses more than just
solving problems; it also deals with the exploitation of
opportunities for better ways to achieve the enterprise
goals. These opportunities might involve lowering of
operating costs, increasing market share, decreasing
deployment risk, reducing time to market, and any
number of other enterprise goals. The importance of
addressing opportunity potentials should not be underes­
timated in the execution of enterprise SE practices.
The operational capabilities of an enterprise will have
a contribution to operational value (as perceived by the
stakeholders). Notice that the organization or enterprise
can deal with either the system as a whole or with only
one (or a few) of its elements. These elements are not
necessarily hard items, like hardware and software, but
can also include “soft” items, like people, processes,
principles, policies, practices, organizations, doctrines,
theories, beliefs, and so on.
8.5.4

Enterprise Transformation

Enterprises are constantly transforming, whether at the
individual level (wherein individuals alter their work
practices) or at the enterprise level (large‐scale planned

strategic changes) (Srinivansan, 2010). These changes
are a response on the part of the enterprise to evolving
opportunities and emerging threats. It is not merely a
matter of doing work better, but doing different work,
which is often a more important result. Value is created
through the execution of business processes. However,
not all processes necessarily contribute to overall value
(Rouse, 2005). It is important to focus on process and
how they contribute to the overall value stream.
Rebovich says there are “new and emerging modes of
thought that are increasingly being recognized as essential
to successful systems engineering in enterprises” (2006).
For example, in addition to the traditional SE process
areas, MITRE has included the following process areas in
their enterprise SE process to close the gap between
enterprise SE and traditional SE (DeRosa, 2005):
•• Strategic technical planning
•• Enterprise architecture
•• Capabilities‐based planning analysis
•• Technology planning
•• Enterprise analysis and assessment
These enterprise SE processes are shown in the context
of the entire enterprise in Figure 8.9 (DeRosa, 2006).
The enterprise SE processes are shown in the middle
with business processes on the left and traditional SE
processes on the right. Further information on using SE
practices to transform an enterprise is provided in

Enterprise management

Traditional
business
process
areas

Vision
goals
conflict mgmt
roles and resp

Reqts dev and mgmt
Enterprise SE
Risk mgmt
Strategic technical planning Config mgmt
Tech projectg ping
Enterprise architecture
Capability planning analysis Quality assurance
System safety
Technology planning
Integ logistics spt

Restructure
the
enterprise

Process
improvement

Design
implement
transition

Diagnostics

Analysis and assessment

Integrated test

Traditional
systems
engineering
process
areas

Enterprise assessment
Figure 8.9 Enterprise SE process areas in the context of the entire enterprise. Reprinted with permission from the MITRE
Corporation. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Application of Systems Engineering for Very Small and Micro Enterprises

Transforming the Enterprise Using a Systems Approach
(Martin, 2011).
8.6 Application of Systems
Engineering for Very Small and
Micro Enterprises
VSMEs are defined as organizations that have a small
number of employees, many times less than 50 and as
few as 1. The contributions of VSMEs to the global
economy are well documented. By some estimates, over
98% of economic value is generated globally by enter­
prises with less than 25 people. In addition, VSMEs
­contribute to large enterprise systems and SoS and are
important and essential to system success. VSME
guidance is generic and applicable to SE functions in
any domain.
Tailoring of SE processes in any life cycle stage or
domain is typical for all projects but is crucial for small
enterprises. Of course, as with any project tailoring for
processes, the tailoring needs to be risk driven, accounting
for things such as the criticality attributes of the project.
Due to their small size, VSMEs often find it difficult to
apply international standards to their business needs
and to justify the application of standards to their
business practices. The typical VSME does not have a

179

comprehensive infrastructure, and the few personnel
usually are performing multiple roles.
The ISO/IEC/IEEE 29110 standard series defines SE
life cycle processes for very small entities (VSEs)
derived from ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288 and consistent with
this handbook. The ISO/IEC/IEEE 29110 Series (2014)
standards define profiles to provide the VSME guidance
for use of the standard on noncritical programs. The pro­
files are oriented on the level of involvement in a product
development. A profile is a type of matrix that identifies
which elements should be taken from existing standards.
A collection of four profiles (entry, basic, intermediate,
and advanced) provides a progressive approach to serv­
ing most VSMEs.
The entry profile focuses on start‐up VSMEs and
those working on small projects (i.e., project size of
less than six person‐months). The basic profile
describes the system development practices of a single
application by a single project team and with no spe­
cial risk or situational factors. The intermediate profile
is aimed at VSMEs developing multiple projects, while
the advanced profile applies to VSMEs that want to
grow as independent system development businesses.
For critical programs, such as mission critical or
safety critical, this guidance does not apply, since the
criticality of the programs would dictate a much greater
level of rigor and comprehensive SE.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

9
Cross‐Cutting Systems Engineering
Methods

The previous chapters provided a serial description of
the systems engineering (SE) processes used across the
system life cycle. This chapter provides insight into
methods that cut across the SE processes, reflecting var­
ious aspects of the iterative and recursive nature of SE.
9.1

Modeling and Simulation

Stakeholders of the SE life cycle have used models and
simulations for some time both to check their own thinking
and to communicate their concepts to others. The benefit
is twofold: (i) models and simulations confirm the need
for the systems and the anticipated system behaviors
before proceeding with the development of an actual
system, and (ii) models and simulations present a clear,
coherent design to those who will develop, test, deploy,
and evolve the system, thereby maximizing productivity
and minimizing error. The ability to detect limitations and
incompatibilities via system models and simulations early
in a project helps avoid higher project cost and schedule
overruns later in a project, especially during system oper­
ation. The value of modeling and simulation increases
with the size, be it physical or complexity, of the system or
system of systems (SoS) under development.

Early in the SE life cycle, the objective of modeling
and simulation is to obtain information about the system
before significant resources are committed to its design,
development, construction, verification, or operation. To
that end, modeling and simulation helps generate data
in the domain of the analyst or reviewer, not available
from existing sources, in a manner that is affordable and
timely to support decision making. An adequate, accu­
rate, and timely model and simulation informs stake­
holders of the implications of their preferences,
provides perspective for evaluating alternatives, and
builds confidence in the capabilities the system will pro­
vide. They also help the development, deployment, and
operational staffs comprehend the design requirements,
appreciate imposed limits from technology and manage­
ment, and ensure an adequate degree of sustainability.
Finally, adequate, accurate, and timely models and sim­
ulations help the organization and its suppliers provide
the necessary and sufficient personnel, methods, tools,
and infrastructure for system realization.
The long‐term benefits of modeling and simulation
are commensurate with the gap between the extent,
variety, and ambiguity of the problem and the compe­
tencies of downstream staffing. A relatively simple model
of an intended system may be sufficient for a highly

INCOSE Systems Engineering Handbook: A Guide for System Life Cycle Processes and Activities, Fourth Edition.
Edited by David D. Walden, Garry J. Roedler, Kevin J. Forsberg, R. Douglas Hamelin and Thomas M. Shortell.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

180

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Modeling and Simulation

competent staff, whereas a much more elaborate simulation
may be necessary for a less competent staff, especially
one faced with producing a novel, large‐scale system
that is capable of autonomously coping with unpredict­
able mission situations. Ultimately, the benefit of mod­
eling and simulation is proportional to the stakeholders’
perception of the timeliness, trustworthiness, and ease
of use and maintenance of the model or simulation.
Consequently, the planned resources anticipated to be
spent in development, verification, validation, accredita­
tion, operation, and maintenance of the model must be
consistent with the expected value of the information
obtained through use of the model.
9.1.1

Models versus Simulations

The terms model and simulation are often mistakenly
interchanged in discussions. Each term has its own
specific meaning. The term “model” has many definitions
but generally refers to an abstraction or representation of
a system, entity, phenomenon, or process of interest (DoD
5000.59, 2007). The many other definitions of model gen­
erally refer to a model as a representation of some entity
in the physical world. The representations are intended to
describe selected aspects of the entity, such as its geom­
etry, functions, or performance. In the context of SE, a
model that represents a system and its environment is of
particular importance to the systems engineer who must
analyze, specify, design, and verify systems, as well as
share information with other stakeholders. Different types
of models are used to represent systems for different mod­
eling purposes.
The term “simulation” is the implementation of a
model (or models) in a specific environment that allows
the model’s execution (or use) over time. In general, sim­
ulations provide a means for analyzing complex dynamic
behavior of systems, software, hardware, people, and
physical phenomena.
A computer simulation includes the analytical model
that is represented in executable code, the input conditions
and other input data, and the computing infrastructure.
The computing infrastructure includes the computational
engine needed to execute the model, as well as input and
output devices. The great variety of approaches to com­
puter simulation is apparent from the choices that the
designer of computer simulation must make.
In addition to representing the system and its environ­
ment, the simulation must provide efficient computational

181

methods for solving the equations. Simulations may be
required to operate in real time, particularly if there is an
operator in the loop. Other simulations may be required to
operate much faster than real time and perform thousands
of simulation runs to provide statistically valid simulation
results.

9.1.2

Purpose of Modeling

System models can be used for many purposes. One of
the first principles of modeling is to clearly define the
purpose of the model. Some of the purposes that models
can serve throughout the system life cycle include:
•• Characterizing an existing system: Many existing
systems are poorly documented, and modeling the
system can provide a concise way to capture the exist­
ing system architecture and design. This information
can then be used to facilitate maintaining the system
or to assess the system with the goal of improving it.
This is analogous to creating an architectural model
of an old building with overlays for electrical, plumb­
ing, and structure before proceeding to upgrade it to
new standards to withstand earthquakes.
•• Mission and system concept formulation and evaluation: Models can be applied early in the system
life cycle to synthesize and evaluate alternative
mission and system concepts. This includes clearly
and unambiguously defining the system’s mission
and the value it is expected to deliver to its benefi­
ciaries. Models can be used to explore a trade space
by modeling alternative system designs and assess­
ing the impact of critical system parameters such as
weight, speed, accuracy, reliability, and cost on the
overall measures of merit. In addition to bounding
the system design parameters, models can also be
used to validate that the system requirements meet
stakeholder needs before proceeding with later life
cycle activities such as architecting and design.
•• System architecture design and requirements flowdown: Models can be used to support architecting
system solutions, as well as flow mission and system
requirements down to system elements. Different
models may be required to address different aspects
of the system design and respond to the broad range
of system requirements. This may include models
that specify functional, interface, performance, and

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

182

Cross‐Cutting Systems Engineering Methods

physical requirements, as well as other nonfunctional
requirements such as reliability, maintainability, safety,
and security.
•• Support for systems integration and verification:
Models can be used to support integration of the
hardware and software elements into a system, as
well as to support verification that the system satisfies
its requirements. This often involves integrating
lower‐level hardware and software design models
with system‐level design models, which verify that
system requirements are satisfied. Systems integration
and verification may also include replacing selected
hardware and design models with actual hardware
and software products in order to incrementally
verify that system requirements are satisfied. This is
referred to as hardware‐in‐the‐loop testing and soft­
ware‐in‐the‐loop testing. Models can also be used to
define the test cases and other aspects of the test
program to assist in test planning and execution.
•• Support for training: Models can be used to simu­
late various aspects of the system to help train users
to interact with the system. Users may be operators,
maintainers, or other stakeholders. Models may be
a basis for developing a simulator of the system
with varying degrees of fidelity to represent user
interaction in different usage scenarios.
•• Knowledge capture and system design evolution:
Models can provide an effective means for capturing
knowledge about the system and retaining it as part
of organizational knowledge. This knowledge,
which can be reused and evolved, provides a basis
for supporting the evolution of the system, such as
changing system requirements in the face of emerg­
ing, relevant technologies, new applications, and
new customers. Models can also enable the capture
of families of products.
Models represent the essential characteristics of the
system of interest (SOI), the environment in which the
system operates, and the interactions with enabling and
interfacing systems and operators. Models and simula­
tions can be used within most system life cycle processes,
for example:
•• Business or mission analysis—Descriptive model
of the problematic situation ensures the right
problem(s) is being addressed.

•• Requirements (stakeholder and system) definition—
Enables justification of requirements and avoids
over‐/underspecification.
•• Architecture definition—Evaluate candidate options
against selection criteria and enable active agents
to discover the best architecture, including the
integration to other systems.
•• Design definition—Obtain needed design data,
adjust parameters for optimization, and update
system model fidelity as actual data for system ele­
ments become available.
•• Verification and validation—Simulate the system’s
environment, evaluate verification and validation
data (simulation uses observable data as inputs for
computation of critical parameters that are not
directly observable), and validate the fidelity of the
simulation (false‐positives/false‐negatives).
•• Operations—Simulations that reflect actual behavior
and simulate operations in advance of execution for
planning, validation, and operator training.
9.1.3

Model Scope

The model must be scoped to address its intended
purpose. In particular, the types of models and associated
modeling languages selected must support the specific
needs to be met. For example, suppose models are con­
structed to support an aircraft’s development. A system
architecture model may describe the interconnection
among the airplane parts, a trajectory analysis model
may analyze the airplane trajectory, and a fault tree anal­
ysis model may assess potential causes of airplane
failure. For each type of model, the appropriate breadth,
depth, and fidelity should be determined to address the
model’s intended purpose.
The model breadth reflects the system requirements
coverage in terms of the degree to which the model
must address the functional, interface, performance,
and physical requirements, as well as other nonfunc­
tional requirements. For an airplane functional model,
the model breadth may be required to address some or
all of the functional requirements to power up, take off,
fly, land, power down, and maintain the aircraft’s
environment.
The model’s depth indicates the coverage of system
decompo­sition from the system context down to the system
elements. For the air transport SoS example shown in

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Modeling and Simulation

Figure 2.2, a model’s scope may require it to define the
system context, ranging from the aircraft, the control
tower, and the physical environment down to the naviga­
tion system and its system elements, such as the inertial
measurement unit, and perhaps down to the lower‐level
parts of the inertial measurement unit.
The model’s fidelity indicates the level of detail the
model must represent for any given part of the model.
For example, a model that specifies the system interfaces
may be fairly abstract and represent only the logical
information content, such as aircraft status data; or it
may be much more detailed to support higher‐fidelity
information, such as the encoding of a message in terms
of bits, bytes, and signal characteristics. Fidelity can also
refer to the precision of a computational model, such as
the time step required for a simulation.
9.1.4

Types of Models and Simulations

183

9.1.4.1 Types of Models “The image of the world
around us, which we carry in our head, is just a model”
(Forrester, 1961). Most systems start as a mental model
that is elaborated and translated in several stages to form a
final model or simulation product. A model maybe a mental
image of selected concepts, and relationships between
them, that can be translated to sketches, textual specifica­
tions, graphics/images, mock‐ups, scale models, proto­
types, or emulations. Often, separate models are prepared
for distinct viewpoints, such as functional, performance,
reliability, survivability, operational availability, and cost.
It is useful to classify models to assist in selecting the
right kind of model for the intended purpose and scope.
Models can be classified in many different ways. The
model taxonomy shown in Figure 9.1 is one such tax­
onomy and provides a useful classification for one in­
stance as an illustration and not necessarily providing an
exhaustive set of model classes; other classes may exist:
•• Physical mock‐ups—A model that represents an
actual system, such as a model airplane or wind tunnel
model, or a more abstract representation, such as a
model that is often represented using a computer.
•• Abstract models—An abstract model can have many
different expressions to represent a system, entity,
phenomena, or process, which vary in degrees of
formalism. Therefore, the initial classification of
models that distinguishes between informal models
and formal models is noted, with this guidance
focusing on formal models.

There are many different types of models and simula­
tions to address different aspects of a system and differ­
ent types of systems. The specific type of model or
simulation selected for a phase of the system’s life cycle
depends on the intended use and particular characteris­
tics of the system that are of interest and the level of
model accuracy required, in other words its “fitness for
purpose.” Generally, a specific model or simulation focuses
on some subset of the total system characteristics, such
as timing, process behavior, or various performance
measures.

Model
Physical
mockup

Abstract
model
Informal model

Formal model

Geometric

Quantitative

Logical

Pictures

Text documents

Figure 9.1 Sample model taxonomy. Reprinted with permission from Sandy Friedenthal. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

184

Cross‐Cutting Systems Engineering Methods

•• Informal models—One can represent a system using
a simple drawing tool or with words. However,
unless there is clear agreement on the meaning of
the terms in the less formal representations, there is
a potential lack of precision and the possibility of
ambiguity in the representation. While such informal
representations can be useful, a model must meet
certain expectations for it to be considered within
the scope of modeling and simulation for SE.
•• Formal models—Formal models can be further clas­
sified as geometric, quantitative (i.e., mathematical),
and/or logical models. Geometric model represents
the geometric or spatial relationships of the system
or entity. Quantitative models represent quantitative
relationships (e.g., mathematical equations) about
the system or entity that yield numerical results.
Logical models, also referred to as conceptual
models, represent logical relationships about the
system such as a whole–part relationship, an inter­
connection relationship between parts, or a prece­
dence relationship between activities, to name a few.
The logical models are often depicted in graphs
(nodes and arcs) or tables.
The following example illustrates the above taxonomy.
An aircraft may be represented by a three‐dimensional
geometric model that specifies the detailed geometry of
the aircraft. The aircraft may also be represented by a
quantitative model that represents its possible flight tra­
jectories in terms of its acceleration, speed, position, and
orientation. The aircraft may be further represented by a
logical model that describes the source and destination
of signals across the aircraft or potential causes of air­
plane failure, such as how an engine failure can result in
a loss of power and cause the airplane to lose altitude. It
is apparent that many different models may be used to
represent a SOI.
It should be noted that the semantics for each kind of
formal model described above, including the geometric,
quantitative, and logical models, can be defined using a
mathematical formalism.
A system model is used to represent a system and its
environment. A system model may comprise multiple
views of the system to support planning, requirements,
architecture, design, analysis, verification, and valida­
tion. System models can include a combination of
geometric, quantitative, and logical models. They often
span several modeling domains such as different systems

(e.g., thermal, power), different technology domains (e.g.,
hardware, software), and different characteristics (e.g.,
physical, performance). Each of these models must be
integrated to ensure a consistent and cohesive system
representation. As such, the system model must enable
representation of general‐purpose system modeling con­
cepts such as behavior and structure that can be shared
across modeling domains.
A. Wayne Wymore is credited with one of the early
efforts to formally define a system model using a
mathematical framework in A Mathematical Theory of
Systems Engineering: The Elements (1967). Wymore
established a rigorous mathematical framework for
designing systems in a model‐based context.
Some examples of system models may include the
following (from ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288):
•• A functional model that captures the system
functions and their functional interfaces
•• A behavioral model that captures the overall
behavior of the system functions
•• A temporal model that captures the timing‐related
aspects of the architecture
•• A structural model that captures the system ele­
ments and their physical interfaces
•• A mass model that captures the mass‐related aspects
of the system
•• A layout model that captures the absolute and
relational spatial placements of the system elements
•• A network model that captures the flow of resources
among the applicable system functions or elements
9.1.4.2 Types of Simulations Simulations can be
described under one or more of the following types:
•• Physical simulations utilize physical models and
aim to replicate a relatively small number of system
attributes to a high degree of accuracy (fidelity).
Often, such simulations require physical models of
specific environmental attributes with similar levels
of fidelity. Such simulations are often costly to con­
struct and the limited number of system and envi­
ronment attributes restricts the range of questions
that can be answered. This kind of simulation is
used when cheaper computer‐based simulations
cannot be constructed to answer questions. Examples
of physical simulations are wind tunnels tests,

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Modeling and Simulation

environmental tests, and mock‐ups that elucidate
manufactur­ing processes.
•• Computer‐based simulations can be divided into
subtypes based on models of computation (MoC),
for example, discrete event, continuous time solv­
ing, or finite element. Each requires the mathematical
model to conform to a certain structure, and some
can be combined to create a hybrid MoC. Where sto­
chastic processes are being modeled or there is
uncertainty in system inputs, Monte Carlo simula­
tions can be performed in order to perform a
statistical analysis on output of many simulation
runs. There is a trend in simulation environments to
separate the execution architecture (that in effect
implements the MoC algorithm) and the models of
the systems of interest, with the latter being imple­
mented in a modular form. Doing this helps deal
with complex models and improves the possibility
of reusing models in different simulations. Computer‐
based simulations can be made to cover a broad
scope of system attributes and indeed can become
quite complex in their own right by including models
of many types of systems interacting in many differ­
ent ways. When the level of complexity becomes
such that the expertise necessary to create fit‐for‐
purpose models for different parts of the overall sim­
ulation is distributed between many subject matter
experts, the construction of such simulations
becomes in itself an exercise in SE.
•• Hardware and/or human‐in‐the‐loop simulations
execute in real time and use computer‐based models
to close the loop on inputs and outputs with a
hardware and or human element of the system.
Such simulations have a high level of fidelity but
can be costly, especially if physical stimulation is
required, for example, motion or visual scene
generation.
Within the US defense community, it is common to refer
to simulations as live, virtual, or constructive, where:
•• Live simulation refers to live operators operating
real systems
•• Virtual simulation refers to live operators operating
simulated systems
•• Constructive simulation refers to simulated opera­
tors operating with simulated systems

185

The virtual and constructive simulations may also include
actual system hardware and software in the loop as well
as stimulus from a real system environment.
9.1.5

Developing Models and Simulations

The completed model or simulation can be considered a
system or a product in its own right. Therefore, the gen­
eral steps in the development and application of a model
or simulation are closely aligned to the SE processes
described within this handbook. Models need to be
planned and tracked, just like any other developmental
effort.
Executed in parallel and critical to any model and
simulation development effort is the verification, valida­
tion, and accreditation (VV&A) process that certifies
that a model or simulation is acceptable for use for a
specific purpose. Given the consequences of using the
knowledge gained from the model or simulation, the user
of that knowledge must be confident that the knowledge
is of sufficient credibility (i.e., it is “fit for purpose”).
This implies that the associated risks of employing the
model or simulation in the decision process are mini­
mized such that it is perceived that the model and simu­
lation is of more use than not (i.e., the risks of not using
the model or simulation are greater than the risks of
using the model or simulation). The US DoD Modeling
and Simulation Coordination Office has committed
significant resources to produce comprehensive guidance
on VV&A (M&SCO, 2013).
9.1.6 Model and Simulation Integration
Many different types of models and simulations may be
used as part of a model‐based approach. A key activity is
to facilitate the integration of models and simulations
across multiple domains and disciplines. As an example,
system models can be used to specify the elements of the
system. The logical model of the system architecture may
be used to identify and partition the elements of the
system and define their interconnection or other relation­
ships among the elements. Quantitative models for
performance, physical, and other quality characteristics,
such as reliability, may be employed to determine the
required values for specific element properties to satisfy
the system requirements. An executable system model
that represents the interaction of the system elements may
be used to validate that the element requirements can satisfy

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

186

Cross‐Cutting Systems Engineering Methods

the system behavioral requirements. The aforementioned
models each represent different facets of the same system.
The different engineering disciplines for electrical,
mechanical, and software each create their own models
representing different facets of the same system. The dif­
ferent models must be sufficiently integrated to ensure a
cohesive system solution.
To support the integration, the models and simula­
tions must establish semantic interoperability to ensure
that a construct in one model has the same meaning as
a corresponding construct in another model. A simple
example is the name of a particular element that may
appear in a higher‐level system element model, a
reliability model, and electrical design model. This
­
modeling information must be exchanged between
model­
ing tools and consistently represented in the
­different models.
One approach to semantic interoperability is to use model
transformations between different models. Transformations
are defined which establish correspondence between the
concepts in one model and the concepts in another. In
addition to establishing correspondence, the tools must
have a means to exchange the model data and share the
information. There are multiple means for exchanging data
between tools, including file exchange, use of API, and a
shared repository.
The use of modeling standards for modeling lan­
guages, model transformations, and data exchange is
an important enabler of integration across modeling
domains.
9.1.7

Model Management

Since the system models and simulations are primary
artifacts of the SE effort, their management is of
particular importance. The management of models and
simulations throughout the system life cycle includes
configuration management concerns related to version­
ing and change control. These are complex processes in
their own right, particularly when distributed teams may
update different aspects of different pieces. Change
management techniques such as branch and merge may
be employed along with other integration approaches.
Another important aspect of model and simulation
management is the ongoing validation. As changes are
introduced to the models and simulations, the team needs
to ensure they remain a sufficient representation of the
system for their intended purpose.

9.1.8

Modeling Standards

Different types of models are needed to support the
­analysis, specification, design, and verification of sys­
tems. Modeling standards play an important role in
defining agreed‐upon system modeling concepts that can
be represented for a particular domain of interest and
enable the integration of different types of models
across domains of interest.
Standards for system modeling languages can enable
cross‐discipline, cross‐project, and cross‐organization
communication. This communication offers the potential
to reduce the training requirements for practitioners
when transitioning from one project to another and
enables the reuse of system artifacts within and across
projects and organizations. Standard modeling languages
also provide a common foundation for advancing the
practice of SE, as do other SE standards.
Modeling standards include standards for modeling
languages, data exchange between models, and the trans­
formation of one model to another to achieve semantic
interoperability. A partial list of representative modeling
standards can be found under the modeling standards
section of SEBoK (2014).
9.1.9 Modeling Languages
Modeling languages are generally intended to be both
human interpretable and computer interpretable and are
specified in terms of both syntax and semantics.
The abstract syntax specifies the model constructs
and the rules for constructing the model from its con­
structs. In the case of a natural language like English,
the constructs may include types of words such as verbs,
nouns, adjectives, and prepositions, and the rules specify
how these words can be used together to form proper
sentences. The abstract syntax for a mathematical model
may specify constructs to define mathematical functions,
variables, and their relationship. The abstract syntax for
a logical model may also specify constructs to define
logical entities and their relationships such as the inter­
connection relationship between parts or the precedence
relationship between actions. A well‐formed model
conforms to its rules, just as a well‐formed sentence
must conform to the grammatical rules of the natural
language.
The concrete syntax specifies the symbols used to
express the model constructs. The natural language, such

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Modeling and Simulation

as English or German, can be expressed in text or Morse
code. A modeling language may be expressed using
graphical symbols and/or text statements. For example, a
functional flow model may be expressed using graphical
symbols consisting of a combination of graphical nodes
and arcs annotated with text, while a simulation mod­
eling language may be expressed using a text syntax in a
programming language such as Fortran or C.
The semantics of a language define the meaning of
the constructs. For example, an English word does not
have explicit meaning until the word is defined. A sen­
tence can be grammatically correct, but can still be gib­
berish if the words are not defined, or be misunderstood
if the meaning of the words is ambiguous in the context
of their use. The language must give meaning both to the
concept of a verb or noun and to the meaning of a specific
word that is a verb or noun. Similarly, a modeling con­
struct that is expressed as a symbol, such as a box or
arrow on a flowchart, does not have meaning until it is
defined. The box and arrow each represent different con­
cepts. These concepts must be defined, and the specific
boxes and arrows should also be defined. The definitions
can be expressed in natural language or other formal­
isms. For example, the symbols sin(x) and cos(x) repre­
sent the sine and cosine function, which are defined
precisely in mathematics. If the position of a pendulum
is defined in terms of sin(θ) and cos(θ), the meaning of
the pendulum position is understood in terms of these
formalisms.

187

The SysMLTM from the OMG has emerged as an
important modeling language for systems (OMG, 2013b).
Summary descriptions of the SysML diagram types
shown in Figure 9.2 are as follows:
•• A package diagram (pkg) is used to organize the
model into packages that contain other model ele­
ments. This facilitates model navigation and reuse,
as well as access and change control.
•• A requirements diagram (req) captures text‐based
requirements. Having requirements within the model
enables fine‐grained traceability from requirement to
requirement and between requirements and design,
analysis, and verification elements in the model.
•• System structure is represented using block
diagrams:
–– A block definition diagram (bdd) describes the
system hierarchy and classifications of system
elements.
–– An internal block diagram (ibd) depicts the
internal structure of a system in terms of how its
parts are interconnected using ports and connec­
tors, describing how the parts within the system
are interconnected.
•• Behavior is captured in use case, activity, sequence,
and state machine diagrams:
–– A use case diagram (uc) provides a high‐level
description of the system functionality in terms

SysML
diagram

Package
diagram

Use case
diagram

Behavior
diagram

Activity
diagram

Sequence
diagram

Requirement
diagram

State
machine
diagram

Parametric
diagram

Structure
diagram

Block
definition
diagram

Internal
block
diagram

Figure 9.2 SysML diagram types. From Friedenthal et al. (2012), Figure 3.2. Reprinted with permission from Sandy Friedenthal.
All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

188

Cross‐Cutting Systems Engineering Methods

of how users and external systems use the system
to achieve their goals.
–– An activity diagrams (act) represents the trans­
formation of inputs to outputs through a con­
trolled sequence of actions.
–– A sequence diagram (sd) represents interaction
in terms of the time‐ordered exchange of mes­
sages between collaborating parts of a system.
–– A state machine diagram (stm) describes the
states of a system or its parts; the transitions
­between the states; the actions that occur within
states or upon transition, entry, or exit; and the
events that trigger transitions.
•• A parametric diagram (par) represents constraints
on system property values as necessary to support
detailed engineering analysis. These constraints may
include performance, reliability, and mass prop­
erties, among others. SysML™ can be integrated
with other engineering analysis models and tools to
execute the analysis.
SysML includes an allocation relationship to represent
allocation of functions to elements, allocation of logical
to physical elements, and other types of allocations.
SysML™ is a general‐purpose modeling language that is
intended to support many different model‐based methods,
such as structured analysis methods and object‐oriented
methods. A particular method may require only a subset of
the diagrams. For example, a simplified functional anal­
ysis method may only require activity diagrams augmented
by bdds, ibds, and perhaps requirements diagrams.
For general information on SysML™, along with
links to tool vendors, articles, and books, see the official
OMG SysML™ website at http://www.omgsysml.org.
9.1.10 Modeling and Simulation Tools
Models and simulations are created by a modeler using
modeling and simulation tools. For physical models (e.g.
physical mock‐ups), the modeling tools may include
drills, lathes, and hammers. For abstract models, the
modeling tools are typically software programs running
on a computer. These programs provide the ability to
express modeling constructs using a particular modeling
language. A word processor can be viewed as a tool used
to build text descriptions using natural language. In a
similar way, a modeling tool is used to build models

using a modeling language. The tool often provides a
tool palette to select symbols and a content area to con­
struct the model from the graphical symbols or other
concrete syntax. A modeling tool typically checks the
model to evaluate whether it conforms to the rules of the
language and enforces such rules to help the modeler
create a well‐formed model. This is similar to the way a
word processor checks the text to see that it conforms to
the grammar rules for the natural language.
Some modeling and simulation tools are commer­
cially available products, while others may be created or
customized to provide unique modeling solutions.
Modeling and simulation tools are often used as part of a
broader set of engineering tools, which constitute the
system development environment. There is increased
emphasis on tool support for standard modeling lan­
guages that enable models and modeling information to
be interchanged among different tools.
9.1.11

Indicators of Model Quality

The quality of a model should not be confused with the
quality of the design that the model represents. For
example, one may have a high‐quality, computer‐aided
design model of a chair that accurately represents the
design of the chair, yet the design itself may be flawed
such that when one sits in the chair, it falls apart. A high‐
quality model should provide a representation sufficient
to assist the design team in assessing the quality of the
design and uncovering design issues.
Model quality is often assessed in terms of the adher­
ence of the model to modeling guidelines and the degree
to which the model addresses its intended purpose.
Typical examples of modeling guidelines include ­naming
conventions, application of appropriate model annota­
tions, proper use of modeling constructs, and applying
model reuse considerations. Specific guidelines are dif­
ferent for different types of models. For example, the
guidelines for developing a geometric model using a
computer‐aided design tool may include conventions
for defining coordinate systems, dimensioning, and
tolerances.
9.1.12

Model and Simulation‐Based Metrics

Models and simulations can provide a wealth of informa­
tion that can be used for both technical and manage­ment
metrics to assess the modeling and simulation efforts

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Model‐Based Systems Engineering

and, in many cases, the overall SE effort. Different types
of models and simulations provide different types of
information. In general, models and simulations provide
information that enables one to:
•• Assess progress
•• Estimate effort and cost
•• Assess technical quality and risk
•• Assess model quality
A model’s progress can be assessed in terms of the com­
pleteness of the modeling effort relative to the defined
scope of the model. Models may also be used to assess
progress in terms of the extent to which the requirements
have been satisfied by the design or verified through test­
ing. When augmented with productivity metrics, the
model can be used to estimate the cost of performing the
required SE effort to deliver the system.
Models and simulations can be used to identify criti­
cal system parameters and assess technical risks in terms
of any uncertainty that lies in those parameters. The
models and simulations can also be used to provide addi­
tional metrics that are associated with its purpose. For
example, when the model’s purpose is to support mission
and system concept formulation and evaluation, then a
key metric may be the number of alternative concepts
that are explored over a specified period of time.

9.2

Model‐Based Systems Engineering

This section provides an overview of the model‐based
SE (MBSE) methodology including a summary of bene­
fits of a model‐based approach over a more traditional
document‐based approach, the purpose and scope of an
MBSE approach, references to a survey of MBSE
methods used to perform MBSE, and a brief discussion
on model management.
9.2.1

MBSE Overview

A number of model and simulation practices have been
formalized into SE processes. These processes are the
foundation of MBSE. The INCOSE Systems Engineering
Vision 2020 (2007) defines MBSE as “the formalized
application of modeling to support system requirements,
design, analysis, verification, and validation activities

189

beginning in the conceptual design phase and continuing
throughout development and later life cycle phases.”
MBSE enhances the ability to capture, analyze, share,
and manage the information associated with the specifi­
cation of a product, resulting in the following benefits:
•• Improved communications among the develop­
ment stakeholders (e.g., the customer, program
management, systems engineers, hardware and
software developers, testers, and specialty engi­
neering disciplines)
•• Increased ability to manage system complexity
by enabling a system model to be viewed from
­multiple perspectives and to analyze the impact of
changes
•• Improved product quality by providing an unam­
biguous and precise model of the system that can
be evaluated for consistency, correctness, and
completeness
•• Enhanced knowledge capture and reuse of the
information by capturing information in more stan­
dardized ways and leveraging built‐in abstraction
mechanisms inherent in model‐driven approaches.
This in turn can result in reduced cycle time and
lower maintenance costs to modify the design
•• Improved ability to teach and learn SE fundamentals by providing a clear and unambiguous repre­
sentation of the concepts
MBSE is often contrasted with a traditional document‐
based approach to SE. In a document‐based SE approach,
there is often considerable information generated about
the system that is contained in documents and other arti­
facts such as specifications, interface control documents,
system description documents, trade studies, analysis
reports, and verification plans, procedures, and reports.
The information contained within these documents is
often difficult to maintain and synchronize, and difficult
to assess in terms of its quality (correctness, complete­
ness, and consistency).
In an MBSE approach, much of this information is
captured in a system model or set of models. The system
model is a primary artifact of the SE process. MBSE for­
malizes the application of SE through the use of models.
The degree to which this information is captured in
models and maintained throughout the life cycle depends
on the scope of the MBSE effort. Leveraging an MBSE

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

190

Cross‐Cutting Systems Engineering Methods

approach to SE is intended to result in significant improve­
ments in system requirements, architecture, and design
quality; lower the risk and cost of system development by
surfacing issues early in the system definition; enhance
productivity through reuse of system artifacts; and improve
communications among the system development team.
9.2.1.1 Survey of MBSE Methodologies In general,
a methodology can be defined as the collection of related
processes, methods, and tools used to support a specific
discipline (Martin, 1996). That more general notion of
methodology can be specialized to MBSE methodology,
which we characterize as the collection of related
processes, methods, and tools used to support the
­discipline of SE in a “model‐based” or “model‐driven”
context (Estefan, 2008).
In 2008, a survey of candidate MBSE methodologies
was published under the auspices of an INCOSE
technical publication (Estefan, 2008). Six (6) candidate
MBSE methodologies were surveyed: INCOSE Object‐
Oriented Systems Engineering Method (OOSEM), IBM
Rational Telelogic Harmony‐SE, IBM Rational Unified
Process for Systems Engineering (RUP‐SE), Vitech
MBSE Methodology, JPL State Analysis (SA), and Dori
Object‐Process Methodology (OPM). Additional informa­
tion on these methodologies is available on the INCOSE
MBSE Initiative Wiki (INCOSE, 2010a).
Two example methods that are included in the SE
handbook are the functions‐based SE (FBSE) method in
Section 9.3 and OOSEM in Section 9.4. Although the
functions‐based method is not referred to as model
based, there are other functions‐based methods such as
the Vitech MBSE Methodology that are explicitly model
based. OOSEM is defined as an end‐to‐end MBSE
method, where the artifacts of the method are modeling
artifacts that are managed and controlled throughout the
SE process.

Top-level functions
and allocated
performance
requirements

9.3 Functions‐Based Systems
Engineering Method
9.3.1

Introduction

FBSE is an approach to SE that focuses on the functional
architecture of the system. A function is a characteristic
task, action, or activity that must be performed to achieve
a desired outcome. A function may be accomplished by
one or more system elements comprising equipment
(hardware), software, firmware, facilities, personnel, and
procedural data.
The objective of FBSE is to create a functional
architecture for which system products and processes
can be designed and to provide the foundation for
defining the system architecture through the allocation
of functions and subfunctions to hardware/software,
databases, facilities, and operations (e.g., personnel).
FBSE describes what the system will do, not how it
will do it. Ideally, this process begins only after all of
the system requirements have been fully identified.
Often, this will not be possible, and these tasks will have
to be done iteratively, with the functional architecture
being further defined as the system requirements evolve.
9.3.1.1 Method Overview The FBSE process is itera­
tive, even within a single stage in the system life cycle.
The functional architecture begins at the top level as a set
of functions that are defined in the applicable require­
ments document or specification, each with functional,
performance, and limiting requirements allocated to it
(in the extreme, top‐level case, the only function is the
system, and all requirements are allocated to it). As
shown in Figure 9.3, the next lower level of the functional
architecture is developed and evaluated to determine
whether further decomposition is required. If it is, then
the process is iterated through a series of levels until a
functional architecture is complete.

Develop next level
of functional
architecture

Evaluate and
determine whether
lower level is needed

Functional
architecture
complete

Repeat for each level
Figure 9.3 Functional analysis/allocation process. INCOSE SEH v1 Figure 4.3‐1. Usage per the INCOSE Notices page.
All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Functions‐Based Systems Engineering Method

FBSE should be conducted iteratively:
•• To define successively lower‐level functions
required to satisfy higher‐level functional require­
ments and to define alternative sets of functional
requirements
•• With requirements definition, to define mission‐
and environment‐driven performance and to deter­
mine that higher‐level requirements are satisfied
•• To flow down performance requirements and design
constraints
•• With architecture and design, to refine the defini­
tion of product and process solutions
At each level of the process, alternative decompositions
and allocations may be considered and evaluated for
each function and a single version selected. After all of
the functions have been identified, then all the internal
and external interfaces to the decomposed subfunctions
are established. These steps are shown in Figure 9.4.
FBSE examines a defined function to identify all the
subfunctions necessary to accomplish that function; all
usage modes must be included in the analysis. This
activity is conducted to the level of depth needed to
support required architecture and design efforts.
Identified functional requirements are analyzed to deter­
mine the lower‐level functions required to accomplish
the parent requirement. Every function that must be per­
formed by the system to meet the operational require­
ments is identified and defined in terms of allocated
functional, performance, and other limiting require­
ments. Each function is then decomposed into subfunc­
tions, and the requirements allocated to the function are
each decomposed with it. This process is iterated until
the system has been completely decomposed into basic
subfunctions, and each subfunction at the lowest level is

Decompose the
function into
subfunctions

Decompose
requirements
and allocate to
subfunctions

191

completely, simply, and uniquely defined by its require­
ments. In the process, the interfaces between each of the
functions and subfunctions are fully defined, as are the
interfaces to the external world.
Identified subfunctions are arranged in a functional
architecture to show their relationships and interfaces
(internal and external). Functional requirements should
be arranged in their logical sequence so that lower‐level
functional requirements are recognized as part of higher‐
level requirements. Functions should have their input,
output, and functional interface requirements (both
internal and external) defined and be traceable from
beginning to end conditions. Time critical requirements
must also be analyzed.
Performance requirements should be successively
established, from the highest to lowest level, for each
functional requirement and interface. Upper‐level
performance requirements are then flowed down and
allocated to lower‐level subfunctions. Timing require­
ments that are prerequisite for a function or set of
functions must be determined and allocated. The result­
ing set of requirements should be defined in measurable
terms and in sufficient detail for use as design criteria.
Performance requirements should be traceable from the
lowest level of the current functional architecture,
through the analysis by which they were allocated, to the
higher‐level requirement they are intended to support.
All of these types of product requirements must also be
verified.
Note that while performance requirements may be
decomposed and allocated at each level of the functional
decomposition, it is sometimes necessary to proceed
through multiple levels before allocating the performance
requirements. Also, sometimes, it is necessary to develop
alternative functional architectures and conduct a trade
study to determine a preferred one. With each iteration of

Evaluate
alternative
decompositions
and select one

Identify all
internal and
external
interfaces

Develop alternative decompositions
Repeat for each function
Figure 9.4 Alternative functional decomposition evaluation and definition. INCOSE SEH v1 Figure 4.3‐2. Usage per the
INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

192

Cross‐Cutting Systems Engineering Methods

FBSE, alternative decompositions are evaluated and all
interfaces are defined.
The products of FBSE can take various formats
depending on the specific stage of the project and on the
specific technique used to develop the functional
architecture. The following are some key outputs gener­
ated from FBSE:
1. Input–process–output (IPO) diagrams—Top‐level
diagram of a data flow that is related to a specific
level of system decomposition. This diagram por­
trays all inputs and outputs of a system but shows
no decomposition.
2. Behavior diagrams—Describe behavior that
specifies system‐level stimulus responses using
­
constructs that specify time sequences, concur­
rencies, conditions, synchronization points, state
information, and performance.
3. Control flow diagrams—Depict the set of all
­possible sequences in which operations may be
performed by a system or a software program.
There are several types of control flow diagrams,
including box diagrams, flowcharts, and state
transition diagrams.
4. Data flow diagrams (DFDs)—Provide an inter­
connection of each of the behaviors that the system
must perform. All inputs to the behavior desig­
nator and all outputs that must be generated are
identified along with each of the data stores that
each must access. Each of the DFDs must be
checked to verify consistency with the IPO dia­
gram or higher‐level DFD.
5. Entity relationship (ER) diagrams—Depict a set
of entities (e.g., functions or architecture elements)
and the logical relationships between them.
6. Functional flow block diagrams (FFBDs)—Relate
the inputs and outputs and provide some insight
into flow between the system functions.
7. Integrated definition for functional modeling
(IDEF) diagrams—Show the relationship bet­
ween functions by sequential input and output
flows. Process controls enter the top of each repre­
sented function, and lines entering the bottom
show the supporting mechanism needed by the
function.
8. Data dictionaries—Documentation that provides
a standard set of definitions of data flows, data

e­ lements, files, etc. as an aid to communications
across the development organizations.
9. Models—Abstractions of relevant characteristics
of a system used as a means to understand, com­
municate, design, and evaluate a system. They are
used before the system is built and while it is being
verified or in service.
10. Simulation results—Output from a simulation of
the system that behaves or operates like the SOI
when provided a set of controlled inputs.
The objective of the functional decomposition activity
is to develop a hierarchy of FFBDs that meet all the
functional requirements of the system. Note, however,
that this hierarchy is only a portion of the functional
architecture. The architecture is not complete until all of
the performance and limiting requirements have been
appropriately decomposed and allocated to the elements
of the hierarchy, as described earlier.
A description of each function in the hierarchy should
be developed to include the following:
1. Its place in a network (e.g., FFBD or IDEF0/1
­diagrams) characterizing its interrelationship with
the other functions at its level
2. The set of functional requirements that have been
allocated to it and define what it does
3. Its inputs and outputs, both internal and external
These various outputs characterize the functional
architecture. There is no one preferred output that will
support this analysis. In many cases, several of these are
necessary to understand the functional architecture and
the risks that may be inherent in the system architecture.
Using more than one of these formats allows for a “check
and balance” of the analysis process and will aid in com­
munication across the system design team.
9.3.2

FBSE Tools

Tools that can be used to perform FBSE include:
•• Analysis tools
•• Modeling and simulation tools
•• Prototyping tools
•• Requirements traceability tools

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Object‐Oriented Systems Engineering Method

9.3.3

FBSE Measures

The following measures can be used to measure the
overall process and products of FBSE:
•• Number of allocation‐related trade studies com­
pleted as a percent of the number identified
•• Percent of analyses completed
•• Number of functions without a requirements allocation
•• Number of functions not decomposed
•• Number of alternative decompositions
•• Number of internal and external interfaces not com­
pletely defined
•• Depth of the functional hierarchy as a percentage
versus the target depth
•• Percent of performance requirements that have been
allocated at the lowest level of the functional hierarchy
9.4 Object‐Oriented Systems
Engineering Method
9.4.1

Introduction

OOSEM (Estefan, 2008) integrates object‐oriented con­
cepts with model‐based and traditional SE methods to help
architect flexible and extensible systems that accommodate
evolving technologies and changing requirements. OOSEM
supports the specification, analysis, design, and verification
of systems. OOSEM can also facilitate integration with
object‐oriented software development, hardware develop­
ment, and verification and validation methods.
Object‐oriented SE evolved from work in the mid‐1990s
at the Software Productivity Consortium in collaboration
with Lockheed Martin Corporation. The methodology was
applied in part to a large, distributed information system
development at Lockheed Martin that included hardware,
software, database, and manual procedure elements. The
INCOSE Chesapeake Chapter established the OOSEM
Working Group in November 2000 to help evolve the meth­
odology further. OOSEM is described in INCOSE and
industry papers (Friedenthal, 1998; Lykins et al., 2000) and
in A Practical Guide to SysML: The Systems Modeling
Language, by Friedenthal et al. (2012).
The OOSEM objectives are as follows:
•• Capture information throughout the life cycle
sufficient to specify, analyze, design, verify, and val­
idate systems

193

•• Integrate MBSE methods with object‐oriented soft­
ware, hardware, and other engineering methods
•• Support system‐level reuse and design evolution
Figure 9.5 depicts the techniques and concepts that con­
stitute OOSEM. OOSEM incorporates foundational SE
practices, object‐oriented concepts, and other unique
techniques to deal with system complexity. Practices
recognized as essential to SE are core tenets of OOSEM.
These include requirements analysis, trade studies, and
Integrated Product and Process Development (IPPD).
See Section 9.7 for more about IPPD, which emphasizes
multidisciplinary teamwork in the development process.
Object‐oriented concepts that are leveraged in OOSEM
include blocks (i.e., classes in UML) and objects, along
with the concepts of encapsulation and inheritance. These
concepts are supported directly by SysML. Techniques
that are unique to OOSEM include parametric flow­
down, system/logical decomposition, requirements vari­
ation analysis, and several others.
9.4.2 Method Overview
The OOSEM supports a development process as illus­
trated in Figure 9.6.
This development process includes subprocesses to:
•• Manage system development—To plan and control
the technical effort, including planning, risk
management, configuration management, and
measurement
•• Define system requirements and design, including
specifying the system requirements, developing the
system architecture, and allocating the system
requirements to system elements
•• Develop system elements—To design, implement
and test the element, which satisfies the allocated
requirements
•• Integrate and test the system—To integrate the
system elements and verify that they satisfy the
system requirements, individually and together
This process is consistent with a typical “Vee” process as
described in Chapter 3. It can be applied recursively and
iteratively at each level of the system hierarchy. For
example, if the system hierarchy includes multiple
system element levels, the process may be applied at the

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

194

Cross‐Cutting Systems Engineering Methods

Casual analysis
Enterprise model
Elaborated model
Requirements variation analysis
System/logical decomposition
Partitioning criteria
Node allocation
etc.

OOSEM
unique

Common
OOSE

SE foundation

Figure 9.5
reserved.

Top down SE approach
Recursive SE process
Use case/scenario driven (requirement’s — test)
Black box/white box
OO concepts
UML/SysML
SE process
Requirements
Trades
etc.

OOSEM builds on established SE foundations. Reprinted with permission from Howard Lykins. All other rights

Stakeholder
rqmts

Manage
system
development
Status and
technical data

Plan
Define system
rqmts and
design

OOSEM
activities

System arch and
allocated rqmts

Test procedures

Procedures
Data
Hardware
Software
Develop
system
element(s)

Integrate
and test
system

System

System element(s)

Figure 9.6 OOSEM activities in context of the system development process. Reprinted with permission from Howard Lykins.
All other rights reserved.

system level to specify the first level of system element
requirements. Then the process can be applied again for
each system element at the first level to specify require­
ments for the system elements at the second level, and
so forth.
To be effective, OOSEM development activities must
be supported by systems engineers applying fundamental
tenets of SE, including the use of multidisciplinary teams

and disciplined management processes such as plann­
ing, risk management, configuration management, and
measure­
ment. OOSEM development activities and
accompanying process flows are more fully described in
Object‐Oriented Systems Engineering Method (OOSEM)
Tutorial (LMCO, 2008) and in Tutorial Material—
Model‐Based Systems Engineering Using the OOSEM
(JHUAPL, 2011).

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Object‐Oriented Systems Engineering Method

Analyze
stakeholder
needs

Optimize and
analyze
alternatives

Common
subactivities
Figure 9.7
reserved.

System use cases/scenarios
Elaborated context
Requirements diagram

Define
logical
architecture

Parametric diagrams
Trade studies

Manage
requirements
traceability

Major SE
development
activities

Causal analysis
Mission use cases/scenarios
Enterprise model

Analyze
system
requirements

Logical decomposition
Logical scenarios
Logical subsystems

Synthesize
candidate physical
architecture

Requirements
traceability

Verify and
validate
system

195

Node diagram
HW, SW, data arch
System deployment

Test plans
Test cases
Test procedures

OOSEM activities and modeling artifacts. Reprinted with permission from Howard Lykins. All other rights

The system requirements and design process is
decomposed into the following OOSEM high‐level
activities, as depicted in Figure 9.7.
9.4.2.1 Analyze Stakeholder Needs This activity
supports analysis of both the “as‐is” and the “to‐be”
enterprise. In OOSEM, an enterprise aggregates the
system with other external systems that work together to
accomplish the mission. The “as‐is” systems and
enterprise are captured in sufficient detail to understand
their limitations and needed improvements. The limita­
tions of the “as‐is” enterprise, as determined through
causal analysis techniques, are the basis for deriving the
mission requirements for the “to‐be” enterprise.
OOSEM specifies the mission requirements for the
“to‐be” enterprise to reflect customer and other stake­
holder needs. The mission requirements include defini­
tion of new and improved capabilities to address the
limitations identified in the causal analysis. The capabil­
ities for the “to‐be” enterprise are represented as use cases
with corresponding MOEs. The “to‐be” enterprise sets
the context for the system or system(s) to be developed.
The modeling artifacts that support analysis, including
use cases, scenario analysis, causal analysis, and context
diagrams, can be captured in the customer’s “as‐is” and/
or “to‐be” concept document(s).

9.4.2.2 Analyze System Requirements This activity
specifies the system requirements that support the
mission requirements. The system is modeled as a black
box that interacts with the external systems and users.
The use cases and scenarios reflect the operational con­
cept for how the system is used to support the mission.
The scenarios are modeled using activity diagrams with
swim lanes that represent the black box system, users,
and external systems. The scenarios for each use case are
used to derive functional, interface, data, and performance
requirements for the black box system. The requirements
management database is updated to trace system require­
ment to use cases and associated mission requirements.
Requirements may change as development proceeds.
For example, a system’s external interfaces may change,
or its performance requirements may increase. Require­
ments variation is evaluated in terms of the probability
that a requirement will change and the impact of such
change on the mission. These factors are included in the
risk assessments and later used to determine how to
design the system to accommodate potential require­
ments changes.
9.4.2.3 Define Logical Architecture This activity
includes decomposing and partitioning the system into
logical elements, for example, a user interface that will

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

196

Cross‐Cutting Systems Engineering Methods

be realized by a web browser or an environmental monitor
that will be realized by an infrared sensor. The elements
interact to satisfy system requirements and capture
system functionality. Having a logical architecture/
design mitigates the impact of requirements and tech­
nology changes on system design.
OOSEM provides guidelines for decomposing the
system into its logical elements. Functions for logical
elements are derived from logical scenarios to support
black box system functions. Logical element function­
ality and data may be repartitioned based on other cri­
teria, such as cohesion, coupling, design for change,
reliability, and performance.
9.4.2.4 Synthesize Candidate Physical Architectures
The physical architecture describes relationships among
physical system elements, including hardware, soft­
ware, data, people, and procedures. Logical elements
are allocated to physical elements. For distributed
­systems, OOSEM includes guidance for distributing
the physical elements across the system nodes to
address concerns, such as performance, reliability, and
security. The system architecture continues to be refined
to address concerns associated with the software,
hardware, and data architectures. Requirements for
each physical element are traced to the system require­
ments and maintained in the requirements management
database.
9.4.2.5 Optimize and Evaluate Alternatives This
activity is invoked throughout all other OOSEM activ­
ities to optimize the candidate architectures and conduct
trade studies to select an architecture. Parametric models
for modeling performance, reliability, availability, life
cycle cost, human, and other specialty engineering con­
cerns are used to analyze and optimize the candidate
architectures to the level needed to compare the alterna­
tives. Criteria and weighting factors used to perform the
trade studies are traced to the system requirements and
MOEs. TPMs are monitored, and potential risks are
identified.
9.4.2.6 Manage Requirements Traceability This
activity is performed throughout the other OOSEM
activities to ensure traceability between requirements,
architecture, design, analysis, and verification elements.
Requirements relationships are established and main­
tained. Requirements in the system model are synchronized

with the requirements management database. Traceability
is continuously analyzed to assess and fill gaps or defi­
ciencies. As requirements change, traceability is used to
assess the impact of requirements changes on the system
design, analysis, and verification elements.
9.4.2.7 Validate and Verify System This activity
verifies that the system design satisfies its requirements
and validates that those requirements meet the stake­
holder needs. Verification plans, procedures, and methods
(e.g., inspection, demonstration, analysis, and test) are
developed. The primary inputs to the development of
the test cases and associated verification procedures are
system‐level use cases, scenarios, and associated require­
ments. The verification system can be modeled using
the same activities and artifacts described earlier for
modeling the operational system. The requirements
management database is updated during this activity to
trace the system requirements and design information to
the system verification methods, test cases, and results.
9.4.3

Applying OOSEM

OOSEM is an MBSE method used to specify and design
systems. These include not only the operational system
such as an aircraft or an automobile but also systems that
enable the operational system throughout its life cycle,
such as manufacturing, support, and verification sys­
tems. The method may also be applied to architect a
system of systems or an enterprise, as well as to architect
individual systems, or even system elements.
OOSEM should be tailored to support specific
­applications, project needs, and constraints. Tailoring
may include varying the degree of emphasis on a
particular activity and associated modeling artifacts
and/or sequencing activities to suit a particular life
cycle model.
The modeling artifacts can also be refined and reused
in other applications to support product line and evolu­
tionary development approaches. Product line modeling
concerns the modeling of variability. Three refinements
are to be considered in order to ensure what could be
called as a “model‐based product line SE”:
•• The modeling of the variability and the constraints
between these variabilities for each type of arti­
facts: Needs, requirements, architecture, tests, and
others.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Interface Management

•• The modeling of the variability for each type of
SysML diagrams: Activity diagrams, use cases, and
others.
•• The modeling of the dependency links between
these artifacts and the constraints between these
variabilities to explain the relationship between
them: As an example for a product line of water
heaters, the variability of the electrical resistance
component power depends, or not, on the vari­
ability of the water heater capacity.
OOSEM can be used in conjunction with principles and
practices from various schools of thought, such as agile
software development. Again, this requires adapting and
tailoring how OOSEM is applied to integrate with the
other approaches.
9.5 Prototyping
Prototyping is a technique that can significantly enhance
the likelihood of providing a system that will meet the
user’s need. In addition, a prototype can facilitate both
the awareness and understanding of user needs and
stakeholder requirements. Two types of prototyping are
commonly used: rapid and traditional.
Rapid prototyping is probably the easiest and one of
the fastest ways to get user performance data and eval­
uate alternate concepts. A rapid prototype is a particular
type of simulation quickly assembled from a menu of
existing physical, graphical, or mathematical elements.
Examples include tools such as laser lithography or com­
puter simulation shells. They are frequently used to
investigate form and fit, human–system interface, opera­
tions, or producibility considerations. Rapid prototypes
are widely used and are very useful; but except in rare
cases, they are not truly “prototypes.”
Traditional prototyping is a tool that can reduce risk or
uncertainty. A partial prototype is used to verify critical
elements of the SOI. A full prototype is a complete repre­
sentation of the system. It must be complete and accurate
in the aspects of concern. Objective and quantitative data
on performance times and error rates can be obtained
from these higher‐fidelity interactive prototypes.
The original use of a prototype was as the first‐of‐a‐
kind product from which all others were replicated.
However, prototypes are not “the first draft” of production
entities. Prototypes are intended to enhance learning and

197

should be set aside when this purpose is achieved. Once
the prototype is functioning, changes will often be made
to improve performance or reduce production costs. Thus,
the production entity may require different behavior. The
maglev train system (see Section 3.6.3) may be consid­
ered a prototype (in this case, proof of concept) for longer
distance systems that will exhibit some but not all of the
characteristics of the short line. Scientists and engineers
are in a much better position to evaluate modifications
that will be needed to create the next system because of
the existence of a traditional prototype.
9.6 Interface Management
Interface management is a proven set of activities that cut
across the SE processes. Although some organizations
treat interface management as a separate process, these
are crosscutting activities of the technical and technical
management processes that the project team should
apply and track as a specific view of the system. When
interface management is applied as a specific objective
and focus of the technical processes, it will often help
highlight underlying critical issues much earlier in the
project than would otherwise be revealed. This would
then impact upon project cost, schedule, and technical
performance.
Interfaces are identified within the architecture defini­
tion process (Section 4.4), as the architecture models
are developed. The interface requirements are defined
through the system requirements definition process
(Section 4.3). As the requirements are defined, the inter­
face descriptions and definitions are defined to the extent
needed for the architecture description within the
architecture definition process (Section 4.4). Any further
refinement and detail of the interface definition is
provided by the design definition process (Section 4.5)
as the details of the specific system implementation
details are defined. The evolution of the system defini­
tion involves iteration between these processes, and the
interface definition is an essential part of it. As the inter­
face identification and definition evolve in the architecture
definition process, there is an objective of keeping the
interfaces as simple as possible (Fig. 4.8).
As part of the interface definition, many projects find
the need or benefit to apply interface standards. In some
cases, such as for plug‐and‐play elements or interfaces
across open systems, it is necessary to strictly apply

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

198

Cross‐Cutting Systems Engineering Methods

interface standards to ensure the necessary interopera­
tion with systems for which the project team does not
control. Examples of these standards include Internet
Protocol standards and Modular Open Systems
Architecture standards. Interface standards can also be
beneficial for systems that are likely to have emergent
requirements by enabling the evolution of capabilities
through the use standard interface definitions that allow
new system elements to be added.
Good communication is a vital part of ensuring the inter­
face management of a system. Many projects incorporate
the use of an Interface Control Working Group (ICWG),
which include members responsible for each of the inter­
facing elements. The ICWG can be focused on internal
interfaces within a single system or the external interfaces
between interoperating or enabling systems. The use of
ICWGs formalizes and enhances collaboration within
project teams or between project teams/organizations. The
use of ICWGs is an effective approach that helps to ensure
adequate consideration of all aspects of the interfaces.
One of the objectives of the interface management
activities is to facilitate agreements with other stake­
holders. This includes roles and responsibilities, the timing
for providing interface information, and the identification
of critical interfaces early in the project through a struc­
tured process. This is done through the project planning
process (Section 5.1). Through specific interface focus as
a part of the risk management process (Section 5.4), early
identification of issues, risks, and opportunities can be

managed, avoiding potential impacts, especially during
integration. Interface management also enhances relation­
ships between the different organizations, giving an open
communication system of issues and cooperation, where
problems can be resolved more effectively.
Finally, after establishing baselines for requirements,
architecture, and design artifacts, the configuration mana­
ge­
ment process (Section 5.5) provides the ongoing
management and control of the interface requirements and
definitions, as well as any associated artifacts (such as
interface control documents, interface requirement speci­
fications, and interface description/definition documents).
Interface management is intended to provide a simple
but effective method to formally document and track the
exchange of information as the life cycle processes are
performed.
9.6.1 Interface Analysis Methods
There are several analysis methods and tools that aid the
interface definition. These methods help to identify and
understand the interfaces in the context of the system,
the system elements, and/or the interfacing systems.
Generally, the system analysis process (Section 4.6) is
invoked by the system requirements definition,
architecture definition, or design definition processes to
perform the interface analysis.
N2 diagrams (see Fig. 9.8) are a systematic approach
to analyze interfaces. These apply to system interfaces,
External
input

FFBD

A

A
to

B
to

B

B
External
input

A

C

D

N2 diagram

External
output

A

B

A
to

C
B
to
C

A
to

D

External
output

C
D
to

A

D
to

C

D

Interfaces flow clockwise
(outputs horizontal, inputs vertical)
Figure 9.8 Sample FFBD and N2 diagram. INCOSE SEH original figure created by Krueger and Forsberg. Usage per the
INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Integrated Product and Process Development

equipment (e.g., hardware) interfaces, or software inter­
faces. N2 diagrams can also be used at later stages of the
development process to analyze and document physical
interfaces between system elements. For effective appli­
cation, an N2 diagram, which is a visual matrix, requires
the systems engineer to generate complete definitions of
all the system interfaces in a rigid bidirectional, fixed
framework.
The system functions or physical elements are placed
on the chart diagonal. The rest of the squares in the N × N
matrix represent the interface inputs and outputs.
Interfaces between functions flow in a clockwise
direction. The entity being passed from function A to
function B, for example, can be defined in the appro­
priate square. When a blank appears, there is no interface
between the respective functions. When all functions
have been compared to all other functions, then the chart
is complete. If lower‐level functions are identified in the
process with corresponding lower‐level interfaces, then
they can be successively described in expanded or lower‐
level diagrams. Sometimes, characteristics of the entity
passing between functions may be included in the box
where the entity is identified. One of the main functions
of the chart, besides interface identification, is to pin­
point areas where conflicts may arise between functions
so that systems integration later in the development cycle
can proceed efficiently (Becker et al., 2000; DSMC,
1983; Lano, 1977).
Alternatively, or in addition, FFBDs and DFDs can be
used to characterize the flow of information among
functions and between functions and the outside world.
As the system architecture is decomposed to lower and
lower levels, it is important to make sure that the inter­
face definitions keep pace and that interfaces are not
defined that ignore lower‐level decompositions.
Other analysis methods that may be useful for inter­
face definition include Design Structure Matrix (DSM)
and the ibd (SysML).
•• “Design Structure Matrix (DSM) is a straightforward
and flexible modeling technique that can be used for
designing, developing, and managing complex sys­
tems. DSM offers network modeling tools that repre­
sent the elements of a system and their interactions,
thereby highlighting the system’s architecture (or
designed structure).” The DSM is very similar in
appearance and usage to the N2 diagram, but a differ­
ent input and output convention is typically used

199

(inputs on the horizontal rows and outputs on the
vertical columns) (Eppinger and Browning, 2012).
•• The ibd specifies the interconnection of parts of the
system in SysML (see Section 9.1.9). They are used
to describe the internal structure of a system in terms
of its parts, ports, and connectors. The ibd provides
the white box, or internal view, of a system block to
represent the final assembly of all blocks within the
main system block (Friedenthal et al., 2012).

9.7 Integrated Product and Process
Development
Integrated Product Development (IPD) recognizes the
need to consider all elements of the product life cycle,
from conception through disposal, starting at the beginning
of the life cycle. Important items to consider include
quality, cost, schedule, user requirements, manufacturing,
and support. IPD also implies the continuous integration
of the entire product team, including engineering, manu­
facturing, verification, and support, throughout the prod­
uct life cycle (DoD, 1998).
Risks inherent in concurrent product development are
reduced by moving away from traditional hierarchical
management structure and organized into Integrated
Product Teams (IPTs). Productivity gains come through
decentralization of processes, avoidance of previous
problems, and better integration between engineering
and manufacturing. Traditional development with serial
activities may be so lengthy such that the product
becomes obsolete before it is completed. With good
interface definition and control, IPD, involving the entire
team, can speed up the development process.
IPPD further recognizes the importance of process.
The following definitions apply to IPPD:
•• Integrated Product Development Team (IPDT)—A
multidisciplinary group of people who are collec­
tively responsible for delivering a defined product
or process.
•• IPPD—The process of using IPDTs to simultaneously
develop the design for a product or system and the
methods for manufacturing the product or system.
The process verification may consist of review of a
process description by an IPDT. It may also include a
demonstration to an IPDT of a process.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

200

Cross‐Cutting Systems Engineering Methods

•• Concurrent engineering—Is a management/­ to complete their assigned processes, which may include
operational approach that aims to improve product
all or some of the development and production steps.
design, production, operation, and maintenance by
The general approach is to form cross‐functional
developing environments in which personnel from
IPDTs for all products and services. The typical types of
all disciplines (e.g., design, marketing, production
IPDTs are a Systems Engineering and Integration Team
engineering, process planning, and support) work
(SEIT), a Product Integration Team (PIT), and a Product
together and share data throughout all stages of the
Development Team (PDT). These teams each mimic a
product life cycle.
small, independent project focusing on individual ele­
ments and/or their integration into more complex system
Integrated development has the potential to introduce
elements. The SEIT balances requirements between
more risk into a development program because down­
product teams, helps integrate the other IPDTs, focuses
stream activities are initiated on the assumption that
on the integrated system and system processes, and
upstream activities will meet their design and interface
addresses systems issues, which, by their nature, the
requirements. However, the introduction of a hierarchy
other IPDTs would most likely relegate to a lower pri­
of cross‐functional IPDTs, each developing and deliv­
ority. Although the teams are organized on a process
ering a product, can reduce risks and provide better prod­
basis, the organizational structure of the team of teams
ucts faster.
may approach a hierarchical structure for the product,
depending upon the way the product is assembled and
IPPD also improves team communications through
integrated.
IPDTs, implements a proactive risk process, makes
decisions based on timely input from the IPDT, and
The focus areas for these IPDT team types and their
improves customer involvement.
general responsibilities are summarized in Table 9.1.
This arrangement often applies to large, multielement,
multiple subsystem programs but must be adapted to the
9.7.1 IPDT Overview
specific project. For example, on smaller programs, the
An IPDT is a process‐oriented, integrated set of cross‐
number of PIT teams can be reduced or eliminated. In
functional teams (i.e., an overall team comprising many
service‐oriented projects, the system hierarchy, focus,
smaller teams) given the appropriate resources and
and responsibilities of the teams must be adapted to the
charged with the responsibility and authority to define,
appropriate services.
develop, produce, and support a product or process (and/
Team members’ participation will vary throughout
or service). Each team is staffed with the skills necessary
the product cycle, and different members may have
Table 9.1 Types of IPDTs and their focus and responsibilities
System hierarchy

Team type + focus responsibilities

External interface and system

Systems engineering and integration team (SEIT)
• Integrated system and processes
• External and program issues
• System issues and integrity
• Integration and audits of teams
Product Integration Teams (PITs)
• Integrated H/W and S/W
• Deliverable item issues and integrity
• Support to other teams (SEIT and PDTs)
Product Development Teams (PDTs)
• Hardware and software
• Product issues and integrity
• Primary participants (design and Mfg.)
• Support to other teams (SEIT and PITs)

Upper‐level elements

Lower‐level elements

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Integrated Product and Process Development

primary, secondary, or minor support roles as the effort
transitions from requirements development through the
different stages of the life cycle. For example, the manu­
facturing and verification representatives may have
minor, part‐time advisory roles during the early product
definition stage but will assume primary roles later, dur­
ing manufacture and verification. Team members partic­
ipate to the degree necessary from the outset to ensure
their needs and requirements are reflected in overall
project requirements and planning to avoid costly
changes later. It is also good for some of the team to
remain throughout the product cycle to retain the team’s
“project memory.”
IPDTs must be empowered with full life cycle respon­
sibility for their products and systems and with the
authority to get the job done. They should not be looking
to higher management for key decisions. They should,
however, be required to justify their actions and decisions
to others, including interfacing teams, the systems
integration team, and project management.
9.7.2

IPDT Process

The basic principle of IPDT is to get all disciplines
involved at the beginning of product development to
ensure that needs and requirements are completely under­
stood for the full life cycle of the product. Requirements
are developed initially at the system level, then succes­
sively at lower levels as the requirements are flowed down.
Teams, led by systems engineers, perform the up‐front
SE activities at each level.
IPDTs do their own internal integration in an IPPD
environment. A SEIT representative belongs to each
product team (or several) with internal and external team
responsibilities. There is extensive iteration between the
product teams and the SEIT to converge on requirements
and design concepts, although this effort should slow
down appreciably after the preliminary design review
and as the design firms up.
Systems engineers participate heavily in the SEIT and
PIT and to a much lesser extent in the PDT. Regardless,
the iterative SE processes described in this handbook are
just as applicable to all teams in the IPPD environment.
It is even easier to apply the processes throughout the
program because of the day‐to‐day presence of systems
engineers on all teams.
IPDTs have many roles, and their integration roles
overlap based on the type of team and the integration

201

level. Figure 9.9 gives examples of program processes
and system activities.
The three bars on the left show the roles of the types
of product teams at different levels of the system. For
example, the SEIT leads and audits in external
integration and in systems integration activities, as indi­
cated by the shaded bar. For program processes
involving lower‐level elements (e.g., parts, components,
or subassemblies), the appropriate PDTs are the active
lead and audit participants, supported by the SEIT and
the PIT.
Basic system activities include system requirements
derivation, system functional analysis, requirements
allocation and flowdown, system trade‐off analysis,
system synthesis, systems integration, TPM definition,
and system verification. The bars for system functions 1,
2, and 3 in the chart show that the SEIT leads and audits
activities on different system activities while the element
teams participate. The lower‐level system element teams
provide additional support, if requested.
The column at the right side of Figure 9.9 shows other
integration areas where all teams have some involve­
ment. The roles of the various teams must also be coor­
dinated for these activities but should be similar to the
example.
9.7.2.1 Organizing and Running a High‐Performance
IPDT The basic steps and key activities to organize
and run an IPDT are as follows:
1. Define the IPDT teams for the project—Develop
IPDT teams that cover all project areas.
2. Delegate responsibility and authority to IPDT
leaders—Select experienced team leaders early in
the development process and avoid frequent
budget changes throughout the life cycle.
3. Staff the IPDT—Candidates must work well in a
team environment, communicate well, and meet
their commitments:
•• Balance the competency, availability, and full‐
time commitment of the core team.
•• Plan when competencies are needed and not
needed.
•• Identify issues where specialists are needed.
4. Understand the team’s operating environment—
Recognize how the team directly or indirectly
influences other teams and the project as a whole.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

202

Cross‐Cutting Systems Engineering Methods

Level
External

Lower level
system elements

Upper level
system elements

System

Program
processes

L
&
A

Element

f1 f2 f3
SEIT

L
&
A

L
&
A

P
P
&
S
S

Component

L
&
A

L
&
A

P

P

End-to-end issues
Operations
Deployment
Mission algorithms
Real-time simulation
Demostration
Top-to-bottom issues
Data system
Cost engineering
Speciality engineering
Trade studies
Interfaces
External
Internal elements

PDT

Part
Team responsibilies:

L
&
A

PIT

Subsystem

Assembly

Other integration
areas

System
functions

S

S

S

Cost and schedule
control
Current and follow-on
systems

L, lead; S, support; P, participate; A, audit.

Figure 9.9 Examples of complementary integration activities of IPDTs. Adapted from Bob Lewis as INCOSE SEH v1
Figure 6.3. Usage per the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

5. Plan and conduct the “kick‐off meeting”—
Recommend two kick‐off meetings, one for the
project as a whole and one for the individual
IPDTs. Well‐planned kick‐off meetings will set
the project off on the right foot.
6. Train the team—Training for the project is a criti­
cal element. The following recommended topics
should be covered:
•• Tailored SE process for the project
•• Project description, stakeholders, purpose,
mission, organization, schedule, and budget
•• Terminology and nomenclature
•• Access to project products
•• Communications skills
•• Project IPDT procedures, measures, and reporting
Additional training sessions should be held and
self‐learning guides should be developed to help
new team members come up to speed on the
project when staff turnover occurs.

7. Define the team vision and objectives—Use col­
laborative brainstorming in the initial IPDT meet­
ings to develop the team’s vision and objectives
such that each member has an ownership. It most
likely will be necessary to bring in other IPDT
members, management, and customers to flesh out
the vision and objectives of the team.
8. Have each team expand the definition of its job—
Once the higher‐level project plan has been reviewed,
each team must identify the tasks, roles, responsibil­
ities, and milestones of the team and each of the mem­
bers. Members need to understand how their individual
tasks fit into the higher‐level project–program tasks.
9. Establish an expectation of routine process
assessment and continuous improvement—Each
team must document the process they are using
and the key measures to be monitored. The teams
must have the mindset of continuous improve­
ment, monitor their own activities, and continually
make course corrections along the way.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Lean Systems Engineering

10. Monitor team progress via measures and reports—
Each team will have a set of measures and reports
to monitor its own progress. These reports and
measures must be reviewed by the SEIT that coor­
dinates among the other IPDTs. These measures
may include an earned value report and technical
measures, such as a defect rate report. The selected
measures are dependent on the team’s role on the
project.
11. Sustain and evolve the team throughout the
project—Personnel assignments to a team will
vary as each team grows, shrinks, and changes
skill mix over the project life cycle. As issues
arise, technical specialists may need to join the
team to help address these specific issues. Services
such as marketing, program controls, procure­
ment, finance, legal, and human resources gener­
ally support the team at a steady, low level of
effort, or as required.
12. Document team products—The team’s products
should be well defined. Because of the IPDT s­ tructure,
the overhead of cross‐organizational communication
varies and should be reduced. When multiple docu­
ments are required, different team members with
identified backups should be assigned as the respon­
sible author with contributions from others. The IPDT
should maintain a log of activities in addition to the
mission, vision, objectives, deliverables, meeting
minutes, decisions, tailored processes, agreements,
team project information, and contact information.
13. Close the project and conduct follow‐up activities—In conjunction with step 12, the IPDT
should maintain records as though the project may
be reengineered at some future time and all
closeout products must be accessible. All IPDT
logs should be organized the same way, when pos­
sible, such that they can be easily integrated into
an overall project report. The closeout should
include lessons learned, recommended changes,
and a summary of measures for the team.
Project managers should review team staffing plans to
ensure proper composition and strive for continuity of
assignments. The advantages of a full‐time contributor
outweigh the work of many part‐time team members.
Similarly, the loss of a knowledgeable key team member
can leave the team floundering. It is important to have

203

people who can work well together and communicate, but
team results may suffer without outstanding technical
specialists and professionals who can make a difference.
Recommended techniques for achieving high performance
in an IPDT are as follows:
•• Carefully select the staff—Excellent people do
excellent work.
•• Establish and maintain positive team interaction
dynamics—All should know what is expected of
the team and each individual and strive to meet
commitments. Anticipate and surface potential
problems quickly (internally and externally).
Interactions should be informal but efficient and a
“no blame” environment where problems are fixed
and the team moves on. Acknowledge and reward
good work.
•• Generate team commitment and buy‐in—Team
alignment to the vision, objectives, tasks, and
schedules. Maintain a team leader’s notebook.
•• Breakdown the job into manageable activities—
Those that can be accurately scheduled, assigned,
and followed up on weekly.
•• Delegate and spread out routine administrative
tasks among the team—Free up the leader to partic­
ipate in technical activities. Give every team member
some administrative/managerial experience.
•• Schedule frequent team meetings with mandatory
attendance for quick information exchanges—
Ensure everyone is current. Assign action items
with assignee and due date.
9.7.3

Potential IPDT Pitfalls

There are ample opportunities to go astray before team
members and leaders go through several project cycles in
the IPDT framework and gain the experience of working
together. Table 9.2 describes some pitfalls common to
the IPDT environment that teams should watch out for.
9.8

Lean Systems Engineering

SE is regarded as an established, sound practice, but not
always delivered effectively. Recent US Government
Accountability Office (GAO, 2008) and NASA (2007a)
studies of space systems document major budget and

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

204

Cross‐Cutting Systems Engineering Methods

Table 9.2

Pitfalls of using IPDT

IPDT pitfalls

What to do

Spending too much time defining the vision and objectives
Insufficient authority—IPDT members must frequently check
with management for approval
IPDT members are insensitive to management issues and
overcommit or overspend
Teams are functionally oriented rather than cross‐functionally
process oriented
Insufficient continuity of team members throughout the project
Transition to the next stage team specialists occurs too early or
too late in the schedule
Overlapping assignments for support personnel compromises
their effectiveness
Inadequate project infrastructure

Converge and move on
Give team leader adequate responsibility, or put the manager
on the team
Team leader must remain aware of overall project objectives
and communicate to team members
Review the steps in organizing and running an IPDT (see
preceding text)
Management should review staffing requirements
Review staffing requirements

schedule overruns. Similarly, recent studies by the MIT‐
based Lean Advancement Initiative (LAI) have identi­
fied a significant amount of waste in government
programs, averaging 88% of charged time (LAI MIT,
2013; McManus, 2005; Oppenheim, 2004; Slack, 1998).
Most programs are burdened with some form of waste:
poor coordination, unstable requirements, quality prob­
lems, and management frustration. This waste represents
a vast productivity reserve in programs and major oppor­
tunities to improve program efficiency.
Lean development and the broader methodology of
lean thinking have their roots in the Toyota “just‐in‐time”
philosophy, which aims at “producing quality products
efficiently through the complete elimination of waste,
inconsistencies, and unreasonable requirements on the
production line” (Toyota, 2009). Lean SE is the applica­
tion of lean thinking to SE and related aspects of organi­
zation and project management. SE is focused on the
discipline that enables flawless development of complex
technical systems. Lean thinking is a holistic paradigm
that focuses on delivering maximum value to the cus­
tomer and minimizing wasteful practices. A popular
description of lean is “Doing the right job right the first
time” and “working smarter, not harder.” Lean thinking
has been successfully applied in manufacturing, aircraft
depots, administration, supply chain management, health­
care, and product development, including engineering.
Lean SE is the area of synergy between lean thinking
and SE, with the goal to deliver the best life cycle value
for technically complex systems with minimal waste.
The early use of the term lean SE is sometimes met with

concern that this might be a “repackaged faster, better,
cheaper” initiative, leading to cuts in SE at a time when
the profession is struggling to increase the level and
quality of SE effort in programs. Lean SE does not take
away anything from SE and it does not mean less SE. It
means more and better SE with higher responsibility,
authority, and accountability, leading to better, waste‐
free workflow with increased mission assurance. Under
the lean SE philosophy, mission assurance is nonnego­
tiable, and any task that is legitimately required for suc­
cess must be included, but it should be well planned and
executed with minimal waste.

Reduce the number of teams
Management involvement to resolve

Lean thinking: “Lean thinking is the dynamic,
knowledge‐driven, and customer‐focused process
through which all people in a defined enterprise con­
tinuously eliminate waste with the goal of creating
value” (Murman, 2002).
Lean SE: The application of lean principles, practices,
and tools to SE to enhance the delivery of value to the
system’s stakeholders.

Three concepts are fundamental to the understanding of
lean thinking: value, waste, and the process of creating
value without waste (also known as lean principles).
9.8.1

Value

The value proposition in engineering programs is often
a multiyear, complex, and expensive acquisition pro­
cess involving numerous stakeholders and resulting in

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Lean Systems Engineering

hundreds or even thousands of requirements, which,
notoriously, are rarely stable. In lean SE, “value” is
defined simply as mission assurance (i.e., the delivery
of a ­
f lawless complex system, with flawless
technical performance, during the product or mission
development life cycle) and satisfying the customer
and all other stakeholders, which implies completion
with minimal waste, minimal cost, and the shortest
possible schedule.
“Value is a measure of worth (e.g., benefit divided by
cost) of a specific product or service by a customer, and
potentially other stakeholders and is a function of (1) the
product’s usefulness in satisfying a customer need,
(2) the relative importance of the need being satisfied,
(3) the availability of the product relative to when it is
needed, and (4) the cost of ownership to the customer”
(McManus, 2004).

9.8.2

Waste in Product Development

The LAI classifies waste into seven categories: overpro­
cessing, waiting, unnecessary movement, overproduc­
tion, transportation, inventory, and defects (McManus,
2005). Lately, the eighth category is increasingly added:
the waste of human potential.
Waste: “The work element that adds no value to
the product or service in the eyes of the customer.
Waste only adds cost and time” (Womack and Jones,
1996).

When applying lean thinking to SE and project planning,
consider each waste category and identify areas of waste­
ful practice. The following illustrates some waste con­
siderations for SE practice in each of the LAI waste
classifications:
•• Overprocessing—Processing more than necessary
to produce the desired output. Consider how pro­
jects “overdo it” and expend more time and energy
than needed:
–– Too many hands on the “stuff” (material or
information)
–– Unnecessary serial production
–– Excessive/custom formatting or reformatting
–– Excessive refinement, beyond what is needed for
value

205

•• Waiting—Waiting for material or information, or
information or material waiting to be processed.
Consider “things” that projects might be waiting for
to complete a task:
–– Late delivery of material or information
–– Delivery too early—leading to eventual rework
•• Unnecessary movement—Moving people (or peo­
ple moving) to access or process material or
information. Consider any unnecessary motion in
the conduct of the task:
–– Lack of direct access—time spent finding what
you need
–– Manual intervention
•• Overproduction—Creating too much material or
information. Consider how more “stuff” (e.g.,
material or information) is created than needed:
–– Performing a task that nobody needs or using a
useless metric
–– Creating unnecessary data and information
–– Information overdissemination and pushing
data
•• Transportation—Moving material or information.
Consider how projects move “stuff” from place to
place:
–– Unnecessary hand‐offs between people
–– Shipping “stuff” (pushing) when not needed
–– Incompatible communication—lost transportation
through communication failures
•• Inventory—Maintaining
more
material
or
information than is needed. Consider how projects
stockpile information or materials:
–– Too much “stuff” buildup
–– Complicated retrieval of needed “stuff”
–– Outdated, obsolete information
•• Defects—Errors or mistakes causing the effort to
be redone to correct the problem. Consider how
projects go back and do it again:
–– Lack of adequate review, verification, or
validation
–– Wrong or poor information
•• Waste of human potential—Not utilizing or even
suppressing human enthusiasm, energy, creativity,
and ability to solve problems and general willing­
ness to perform excellent work.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

206

Cross‐Cutting Systems Engineering Methods

9.8.3

Lean Principles

Womack and Jones (1996) captured the process of cre­
ating value without waste into six lean principles. The
principles (see Fig. 9.10) are abbreviated as value, value
stream, flow, pull, perfection, and respect for people and
are defined in detail in the following.
When applying lean thinking to SE, evaluate project
plans, preparations of people, processes and tools, and
organization behaviors using the lean principles.
Consider how the customer defines value in the products
and processes, then describe the value stream for cre­
ating products and processes, optimize flow through that
value stream and eliminate waste, encourage pull from
each node in that value stream, and strive to perfect the
value stream to maximize value to the customer. These
activities should all be conducted within a foundation of
respect for customers, stakeholders, and project team
members.
In 2009, the INCOSE Lean SE Working Group
released a new online product entitled Lean Enablers
for Systems Engineering (LEfSE), Version 1.0. It is a

collection of practices and recommendations formulated
as “do’s” and “don’ts” of SE based on lean thinking.
The practices cover a large spectrum of SE and other
relevant enterprise management practices, with a gen­
eral focus on improving program value and stakeholder
satisfaction and reducing waste, delays, cost overruns,
and frustrations. LEfSE are currently listed as 147 prac­
tices (referred to as subenablers) organized under 47
nonactionable topical headings called enablers and
grouped into the six lean principles described below
(Oppenheim, 2011):
1. Under the value principle, subenablers promote a
robust process of establishing the value of the end
product or system to the customer with crystal
clarity early in the program. The process should
be customer focused, involving the customer fre­
quently and aligning employees accordingly.
2. The subenablers under the value stream principle
emphasize detailed program planning and waste‐
preventing measures, solid preparation of the

Specify
value from the
perspective of the
customer

Value

Always
compete against
perfection, not just
your current
competition

Characterize
the value stream
for each product/
process and identify
waste

Provide an
environment of
mutual respect,
trust, and cooperation

Perfection

Value
stream

Respect

Deliver only
what is
wanted
when it
is needed

Figure 9.10

Pull

Flow

Make work
elements flow
continuously
with minimal
queues, no
rework, no
stoppages or
backflows

Lean development principles. Reprinted with permission from Bohdan Oppenheim. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Agile Systems Engineering

p­ ersonnel and processes for subsequent efficient
workflow, and healthy relationships between
stakeholders (e.g., customer, contractor, suppliers,
and employees); program frontloading; and use of
leading indicators and quality measures. Systems
engineers should prepare for and plan all end‐to‐
end linked actions and processes necessary to
realize streamlined value, after eliminating waste.
3. The flow principle lists subenablers that promote
the uninterrupted flow of robust quality work and
first‐time right products and processes, steady
competence instead of hero behavior in crises,
excellent communication and coordination, con­
currency, frequent clarification of the require­
ments, and making program progress visible to all.
4. The subenablers listed under the pull principle are
a powerful guard against the waste of rework and
overproduction. They promote pulling tasks and
outputs based on internal and external customer
needs (including rejecting others as waste) and
better coordination between the pairs of employees
handling any transaction before their work begins
so that the result can be first‐time right.
5. The perfection principle promotes excellence in the
SE and organization processes, the use of the wealth
of lessons learned from previous programs in the
current program, the development of perfect collab­
oration policy across people and processes, and
driving out waste through standardization and con­
tinuous improvement. Imperfections should be
made visible in real time, and continuous improve­
ment tools (root cause analysis and permanent fix)
should be applied. A category of these subenablers
calls for a more important role of systems engineers,
with responsibility, accountability, and authority for
the overall technical success of the program.
6. Finally, the respect‐for‐people principle contains
subenablers that promote the enterprise culture of
trust, openness, honesty, respect, empowerment,
cooperation, teamwork, synergy, and good com­
munication and coordination and enable people
for excellence.

Engineering Programs (LEfMEP) (Oehmen, 2012),
incorporating all LEfSE, adding lean enablers for project
and program management, and holistically integrating
lean program management with lean SE. A major section
of the book is devoted to a rigorous analysis of chal­
lenges in managing engineering programs. They are pre­
sented under the following 10 top challenge themes:
1. Firefighting—reactive program execution
2. Unstable, unclear, and incomplete requirements
3. Insufficient alignment and coordination of the
extended enterprise
4. Processes that are locally optimized and not
integrated for the entire enterprise
5. Unclear roles, responsibilities, and accountability
6. Mismanagement of program culture, team com­
petency, and knowledge
7. Insufficient program planning
8. Improper metrics, metric systems, and key
performance indicators
9. Lack of proactive program risk management
10. Poor program acquisition and contracting practices
The 326 lean enablers in Oehmen (2012) are listed in
several convenient ways: under the six lean principles,
under the 10 major challenge themes, under the SE
processes used in this volume, and under the management
performance domains defined in (PMI, 2013).
The LEfSE and LEfMEP are not intended to become
mandatory practices. Instead, they should be used as a
checklist of excellent holistic practices validated by the
community of practice. Awareness of the enablers should
improve the thinking at work and significantly improve
program quality. Early feedback from the organizations
practicing lean enablers indicates significant benefits
(Oppenheim, 2011).
The INCOSE Lean SE Working Group public website
(2011) contains a rich menu of publications and case
studies related to both LEfSE and LEfMEP.

9.9
In 2011, a follow‐on major project undertaken jointly by
the Project Management Institute (PMI), INCOSE, and
the LAI at Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the
leading role developed Lean Enablers for Managing

207

Agile Systems Engineering

Historically, agile software engineering processes came
into awareness in 2001 with the declaration of the Agile
Manifesto (Beck et al., 2001), which spawned interest in

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

208

Cross‐Cutting Systems Engineering Methods

a number of methodologies, with names such as Scrum
and Extreme Programming. But adoption of those meth­
odologies and consideration of how they might inform
nonsoftware engineering (Carson, 2013) has tended to
focus on software‐related specific practices rather than
fundamental frameworks. In contrast, a cross‐industry
study in 1991 (Nagel, 1992) observed that technology
and the environment in which it is deployed were
coevolving at an increasing rate, outpacing the adaptation
capabilities of most organized human endeavors. Agility,
as a systemic characteristic, was thus identified, and sub­
sequently studied to identify domain‐independent met­
rics, architecture, and design principles (Dove, 2001).
Agility is a capability exhibited by systems and
processes that enables them to sustain effective operation
under conditions of unpredictability, uncertainty, and
change. The value proposition of an agile SE process is
risk management, appropriate when development speed
and customer satisfaction are likely to be affected by
requirements understandings that evolve during system
development.
Common causes for requirements evolution include
insufficient initial understanding, new understandings
revealed during development, and evolving knowledge of
the deployment environment. If ignored, requirements evo­
lution reduces or eliminates customer satisfaction. If unmit­
igated, requirements evolution causes rework and scrapped
work, a principal source of time and cost overruns.
An agile system architecture incurs expense in infra­
structure and modularity design, which should be
weighed against probabilistic costs for requirements
evolution. This is risk management. The purpose of an
agile SE process is to reduce the technical, cost, and
schedule risks associated with accommodating benefi­
cial requirements evolution.
Agility is the ability to respond effectively to
­surprises—good or bad. Practices and techniques should
be chosen for compatibility and synergy with the nature
of the project (Carson, 2013; Sillitto, 2013) and the
cultural environment in which they will be employed.
9.9.1

Agile SE Framework

Agile SE (Forsberg et al., 2005) is summarized as follows:
•• Leverages an agile architecture for SE (process),
enabling reconfiguration of goals, requirements,
plans, and assets, predictably.

•• Leverages an architecture for agile SE (product),
enabling changes to the product (system) during
development and fabrication, predictably.
•• Leverages an empowered intimately involved
“product owner” (chief systems engineer, customer,
or equivalent responsible authority on product
vision), enabling broad‐level systems thinking to
inform real‐time decision making as requirements
understanding evolve.
•• Leverages human productivity factors that affect
engineering, fabrication, and customer satisfaction
in an unpredictable and uncertain environment.
9.9.2

Agile Metric Framework

Agility measures are enabled and constrained principally
by architecture—in both the process and the product of
development:
•• Time to respond, measured in both the time to
understand a response is necessary and the time to
accomplish the response
•• Cost to respond, measured in both the cost of
accomplishing the response and the cost incurred
elsewhere as a result of the response
•• Predictability of response capability, measured
before the fact in architectural preparedness for
response and confirmed after the fact in repeatable
accuracy of response time and cost estimates
•• Scope of response capability, measured before the
fact in architectural preparedness for comprehen­
sive response capability within mission and con­
firmed after the fact in repeatable evidence of broad
response accommodation
9.9.3

Agile Architectural Framework

Agile SE and agile‐systems engineering are two differ­
ent things (Haberfellner and de Weck, 2005) with a
shared common architecture that enables the agility in
each (Dove, 2012). The architecture will be recognized
in a simple sense as a drag‐and‐drop plug‐and‐play
loosely coupled modularity, with some critical aspects
not often called to mind with the general thoughts of a
modular architecture.
There are three critical elements in the architecture: a
roster of drag‐and‐drop encapsulated modules, a passive

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Agile Systems Engineering

infrastructure of minimal but sufficient rules and stan­
dards that enable and constrain plug‐and‐play operation,
and an active infrastructure that designates specific
responsibilities that sustain agile operational capability:
•• Modules—Modules are self‐contained encapsu­
lated units complete with well‐defined interfaces
that conform to the plug‐and‐play passive infra­
structure. They can be dragged and dropped into a
system of response capability with relationship to
other modules determined by the passive infrastruc­
ture. Modules are encapsulated so that their inter­
faces conform to the passive infrastructure, but
their methods of functionality are not dependent on
the functional methods of other modules except as
the passive infrastructure dictates.
•• Passive infrastructure—The passive infrastructure
provides drag‐and‐drop connectivity between mod­
ules. Its value is in isolating the encapsulated mod­
ules so that unexpected side effects are minimized
and new operational functionality is rapid. Selecting
passive infrastructure elements is a critical balance
between requisite variety and parsimony—just
enough in standards and rules to facilitate module
connectivity but not so much to overly constrain
innovative system configurations.
•• Active infrastructure—An agile system is not
something designed and deployed in a fixed event
and then left alone. Agility is most active as new
system configurations are assembled in response to
new requirements—something which may happen
very frequently, even daily in some cases. In order
for new configurations to be enabled when needed,
four responsibilities are required: the collection of
available modules must evolve to be always what is
needed, the modules that are available must always
be in deployable condition, the assembly of new
configurations must be accomplished, and both the
passive infrastructure and active infrastructure must
have evolved when new configurations require new
standards and rules. Responsibilities for these four
activities must be designated and embedded within
the system to ensure that effective response capa­
bility is possible at unpredictable times:
–– Module mix—Who (or what process) is respon­
sible for ensuring that new modules are added to
the roster and existing modules are upgraded in
time to satisfy response needs?

209

–– Module readiness—Who (or what process) is
responsible for ensuring that sufficient modules
are ready for deployment at unpredictable times?
–– System assembly—Who (or what process) assem­
bles new system configurations when new situa­
tions require something different in capability?
–– Infrastructure evolution—Who (or what process)
is responsible for evolving the passive and active
infrastructures as new rules and standards are
anticipated and become appropriate?
9.9.4

Agile Architectural Design Principles

Ten reusable, reconfigurable, scalable design principles
are briefly itemized in this section:
Reusable principles are as follows:
•• Encapsulated modules—Modules are distinct, sep­
arable, loosely coupled, independent units cooper­
ating toward a shared common purpose.
•• Facilitated interfacing (plug compatibility)—
Modules share well‐defined interaction and inter­
face standards and are easily inserted or removed in
system configurations.
•• Facilitated reuse—Modules are reusable and repli­
cable, with supporting facilitation for finding and
employing appropriate modules.
Reconfigurable principles are as follows:
•• Peer–peer interaction—Modules communicate
directly on a peer‐to‐peer relationship; and parallel
rather than sequential relationships are favored.
•• Distributed control and information—Modules are
directed by objective rather than method; decisions
are made at point of maximum knowledge, and
information is associated locally and accessible
globally.
•• Deferred commitment—Requirements can change
rapidly and continue to evolve. Work activity,
response assembly, and response deployment that
are deferred to the last responsible moment avoid
costly wasted effort that may also preclude a
subsequent effective response.
•• Self‐organization—Module relationships are self‐
determined where possible, and module interaction
is self‐adjusting or self‐negotiated.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

210

Cross‐Cutting Systems Engineering Methods

Scalable principles are as follows:
•• Evolving standards—Passive infrastructure stan­
dardizes intermodule communication and interac­
tion, defines module compatibility, and is evolved
by designated responsibility for maintaining current
and emerging relevance.

•• Redundancy and diversity—Duplicate modules
provide capacity right‐sizing options and fail‐soft
tolerance, and diversity among similar modules
employing different methods is exploitable.
•• Elastic capacity—Modules may be combined in
responsive assemblies to increase or decrease
functional capacity within the current architecture.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

10
Specialty Engineering Activities

The objective of this chapter is to give enough information
to systems engineers to appreciate the significance of
various engineering specialty areas, even if they are not
an expert in the subject. It is recommended that subject
matter experts are consulted and assigned as appropriate
to conduct specialty engineering analysis. The topics in
this chapter are covered in alphabetical order by topic
title to avoid giving more weight to one topic over
another. More information about each specialty area can
be found in references to external sources.
With a few exceptions, the forms of analysis presented
herein are similar to those associated with SE. Most anal­
ysis methods are based on the construction and explora­
tion of models that address specialized engineering areas,
such as electromagnetic compatibility (EMC), reliability,
safety, and security. Not every kind of analysis and associ­
ated model will be applicable to every application domain.
10.1 Affordability/Cost‐Effectiveness/
Life Cycle Cost Analysis
As stated in Blanchard and Fabrycky (2011),
Many systems are planned, designed, produced, and
operated with little initial concern for affordability and
the total cost of the system over its intended lifecycle…

The technical [aspects are] usually considered first, with
the economic [aspects] deferred until later.

This section addresses economic and cost factors under
the general topics of affordability and cost‐effectiveness.
The concept of life cycle cost (LCC) is also discussed.
10.1.1

Affordability Concepts

Improving design methods for affordability (Bobinis
et al., 2013; Tuttle and Bobinis, 2013) is critical for all
application domains. The INCOSE and the National
Defense Industrial Association (NDIA) (the Military
Operations Research Society (MORS) has also adapted
these definitions) have addressed “affordability” through
ongoing affordability working groups started in late
2009 and have defined system affordability through
these ongoing working groups. Both organizations have
defined system affordability as follows:
•• INCOSE Affordability Working Group definitions
(June 2011):
Affordability is the balance of system performance,
cost and schedule constraints over the system life
while satisfying mission needs in concert with stra­
tegic investment and organizational needs.

INCOSE Systems Engineering Handbook: A Guide for System Life Cycle Processes and Activities, Fourth Edition.
Edited by David D. Walden, Garry J. Roedler, Kevin J. Forsberg, R. Douglas Hamelin and Thomas M. Shortell.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

211

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

212

Specialty Engineering Activities

affordability analyses. As a result of these high‐level dis­
cussions, the key affordability takeaways include:

Design for affordability is the systems engineering
practice of balancing system performance and risk
with cost and schedule constraints over the system life
satisfying system operational needs in concert with
strategic investment and evolving stakeholder value.

•• Affordability context, system(s), and portfolios (of
systems capabilities) need to be consistently
defined and included in any understanding of what
an affordable system is.
•• An affordability process/framework needs to be
established and documented.
•• Accountability (system governance) for afford­
ability needs to be assigned across the life cycle,
which includes stakeholders from the various con­
textual domains.

•• NDIA Affordability Working Group definition
(June 2011):
Affordability is the practice of ensuring program success
through the balancing of system performance (KPPs),
total ownership cost, and schedule constraints while
satisfying mission needs in concert with long‐range
investment, and force structure plans of the DOD.

The concept of affordability can seem straightforward.
The difficulty arises when an attempt is made to specify
and quantify the affordability of a system. This is
significant when writing a specification or when com­
paring two affordable solutions to conduct an affordability
trade study. Even though affordability has been defined by
the INCOSE, NDIA, and MORS, in discussions at an
MORS Special Meeting on Affordability Analysis: How
Do We Do It?, it was noted that all industry groups have
discovered that affordability analysis is contextually
sensitive, often leading to a misunderstanding and incom­
patible perspectives on what an “affordable system is.”
The various industry working groups have recommended
developing and formalizing affordability analysis processes,
including recognizing the difference between cost and

10.1.1.1 “Cost‐Effective Capability” Is a Contextual
Attribute As defined in “Better Buying Power:
Mandate for Restoring Affordability and Productivity in
Defense Spending” (Carter, 2011), “affordability means
conducting a program at a cost constrained by the
maximum resources the Department can allocate for that
capability.” Affordability includes acquisition cost and
average annual operating and support cost. It is expanded
to encompass additional elements required for the LCC
of a system, as an outcome of various hierarchal contexts
in which any system is embedded. Therefore, in the SE
domain, affordability as an attribute must be determined
both inside the boundaries of the system of interest (SOI)
and outside (see Fig. 10.1). This defines, in practical

Design for affordability – Hierarchy of alternatives
Cost vs. performance

Cost vs. robustness
st
Co

Co

e

st

lu
Va

e

lu
Va
System

System of systems
Uncertainty

Uncertainty

e

Co

st

lu
Va
Portfolio of capabilities

Affordability
trade space

Uncertainty
Cost vs. relevancy
Figure 10.1 Contextual nature of the affordability trade space. Derived from Bobinis et al. (2013) Figure 1. Reprinted with
permission from Joseph Bobinis. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Affordability/Cost‐Effectiveness/Life Cycle Cost Analysis

terms, the link between system capability, cost, and what
we call “affordability.” Thus, the concept of affordability
must encompass everything from a portfolio (e.g., family
of automobiles) to an individual program (specific car
model). Affordability as a design attribute of a system
versus a program versus a domain remains contextually
dependent on the stakeholder’s context and the life cycle
of the SOI under examination.
10.1.1.2 Design Model for Affordability As previ­
ously stated, an affordability design model must be able
to provide the ability to effectively manage and evolve
systems over long life cycles. The derived requirements
we will focus on in this section are as follows:
•• Design perspective that assumes the system will
change based on environmental influences, new
uses, and disabling system causing performance
deterioration
•• Causes of system and system element life cycle
­differences (technology management)
•• Feedback functions and measurement of system
behaviors with processes to address emergence (life
cycle control systems)
•• A method to inductively translate system behaviors
into actionable engineering processes (adaptive
engineering)
One of the major assumptions for measuring the afford­
ability of competing systems is that given two systems,
which produce similar output capabilities, it will be the
Functions
Requirements
Priorities
Reliability
Maintainability
Supportability

213

nonfunctional attributes of those systems that differentiate
system value to its stakeholders. The affordability model
is concerned with operational attributes of systems that
determine their value and effectiveness over time, typi­
cally expressed as the system’s “ilities” or specialty
engineering as they are called in this handbook.
These attributes are properties of the system as a
whole and as such represent the salient features of the
system and are measures of the ability of the system to
deliver the capabilities it was designed for over time.
“System integration, and its derivatives across the life
cycle, requires additional discipline and a long term per­
spective during the SE and design phase. This approach
includes explicit consideration of issues such as system
reliability, maintainability and supportability to address
activities pertaining to system operation, maintenance,
and logistics. There is also a need to address real‐world
realities pertaining to changing requirements and cus­
tomer expectations, changing technologies, and evolving
standards and regulations” (Gallios and Verma, n.d.)
(see Fig. 10.2).
10.1.1.3 Impact to Affordability Managing a system
within an affordability trade space means that we are
concerned with the actual performance of the fielded
system, defined in one or more appropriate metrics,
bounded by cost over time. (“System performance” can
be expressed in whatever way makes sense for the system
under study.) The time dimension extends a specific
“point analysis” (static) to a continuous life cycle per­
spective (dynamic). Quantifying a relationship between
cost, performance, and time defines a functional space

Performance

Inherent
Availability

Technical
Effectiveness

Operation
Maintenance
Logistics

Process
Efficiency

System
Effectiveness

Operational
effectiveness
and readiness

Cost as an independent variable (CAIV)/LCC
Figure 10.2 System operational effectiveness. Derived from Bobinis et al. (2013) Figure 4. Reprinted with permission from
Joseph Bobinis. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

214

Specialty Engineering Activities

that can be graphed and analyzed mathematically.
Then it becomes possible to examine how the output
(performance, availability, capability, etc.) changes due
to changes in the input (cost constraints or budget avail­
ability). Hence, utilizing this functional relationship
­between cost and outcome defines an affordability trade
space. Done correctly, it is possible to analyze specifi­
cally the relationship between money spent and system
performance and possibly determine the point of
diminishing returns.
However, it is frequently necessary to estimate the
value of one variable when the values of the others are
known or specified. These kinds of point solutions
(which in this sense are “coordinates” within the space)
are useful in examining specific relationships, including
making predictions of “average” behavior. Answering
questions regarding “expected value” of some parameter
in terms of others, often for specific points in time, fre­
quently falls into this category. The overall trade space
can then be thought of as the totality of all such point
solutions.
10.1.1.4 Affordability Trade Space throughout the
System Life Cycle The affordability trade space must
reflect the SE focus on meeting operational and
performance characteristics and developing highly reliable
systems. Supportability analysis, which should be done in
conjunction with design, is concerned with developing
highly maintainable systems. These disciplines share a
common goal: fielding robust, capable systems that are
available for use by the end user when needed. Operational
availability (Ao) is then simply another performance
parameter that can be examined as a function of cost
within this space. It is reasonable to conclude that improve­
ments to the design, in this case driven by a stringent Ao
requirement, can lower operation and support costs in the
fielded system. In fact, Ao is an implicit performance
­measure used to calculate expected system effectiveness.
That has to be applied, along with use/market size and
operational requirements, to determine the overall cost‐
effective capability of the system under study.
Supporting a system throughout its life cycle requires
systems engineers to account for changes in the system
design as circumstances change over time, such as
changes in the threat environment, diminishing material
shortage (DMS) issues, and improvements in technology,
SoS relationships, and impact of variables outside the
system.

Given that designers do not control the variables in
the environment, the optimization problem for afford­
ability is different or could be different at any point in
the life cycle. This optimization problem can be managed
by functional criticality, surge, and adaptive require­
ments or as a set of predetermined technology refresh
cycles. It can be optimized for cost or performance
whichever is of most value. The intention is to be able to
measure both as a function of operational performance
efficiency. The affordability model must enhance value
engineering (VE) analysis through the ability to measure
all functional contributions to operational performance.
The designer must be provided with the ability to choose
the range of functions to adjust for optimal impact
and cost.
In all cases, the affordability trade space must be able
to accommodate changes but always driven by the same
key concepts: what does it cost to implement such a
change, and what do we get for it. Consequently, identi­
fying “cost‐effective capability” is still the key to anal­
ysis within the affordability trade space across the system
life cycle.
For instance, consider a system that is unique in the
inventory but is suffering an unacceptably low Ao. Then
the question arises, can we upgrade this system to
improve field performance and do so in a cost‐effective
way? Is it possible to improve the existing reliability and
maintainability characteristics of this system and
increase Ao, given that the system itself has many years
of service life remaining? So the trade space analysis
must show that the upgrades will pay for themselves
over time through lower operation and support costs,
increased capability, or both.
In general, the factors that must be considered within
the trade space across the system life cycle include:
•• Cost versus benefits of different design solutions
•• Cost versus benefits of different support strategies
•• Methods and rationale used to develop these
comparisons
•• Ability to identify and obtain data required to ana­
lyze changes
From a programmatic perspective, analysis of these alter­
natives must also be done in conjunction with identifica­
tion, classification, and analysis of associated risk and
development of a costed plan for implementation.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Affordability/Cost‐Effectiveness/Life Cycle Cost Analysis

215

Most bang for the budget
Maximum
budget

Cost

Affordable
solutions

“Best” value
solutions
(along the curve)

Low cost wins

Compliant
solutions

Performance

Minimum
performance

Figure 10.3 Cost versus performance. Reprinted with permission from Joseph Bobinis. All other rights reserved.

10.1.1.5 Affordability Implementation When one
considers the entire SOI, both the primary and enabling
systems should be treated as an SoS. In the example in
Figure 10.3, the mission‐effectiveness affordability trade
space brings together primary and enabling systems into
an SoS. Note that the SoS is treated as a closed‐loop
system where requirements are modified as the mission
needs evolve. These iterations allow for technology
insertion as the design is updated. Design‐to‐cost (DTC)
targets are set for the primary and enabling systems,
which ensure that affordability throughout the system
life cycle is considered, even as the system evolves.
Affordability measurements that feed back into the
system assessment are KPPs and operational availability,
which ensures that the mission can be accomplished over
time (e.g., those KPPs are met across the system life
cycle; see Fig. 10.4).
To define affordability for a particular program or
system (see Fig. 10.3 as an example of an affordability
range), we must define selected affordability compo­
nents. As such, the following could be specified:
1. Required capabilities
(a) Identify the required capabilities and the time
phasing for inclusion of the capabilities.
2. Required capabilities performance
(a) Identify and specify the required MOEs for
each of the capabilities.
(b) Define time phasing for achieving the MOEs.

3. Budget
(a) Identify the budget elements to include in the
affordability evaluation.
(b) Time‐phased budget, either
(i) for each of the budget elements or
(ii) as the total budget.
At least one of the affordability elements needs to be
designated as the decision criteria that will be used in
either a trade study or as the basis for a contract award.
The affordability elements that are not designated as the
decision criteria become constraints, along with the con­
straints being specified. This is illustrated by an example
depicted in Figure 10.3. Here, the capabilities and
schedule have been fixed leaving either the cost or the
performance to be the evaluation criteria, while the other
becomes the constraint. This results in a relatively
simple relationship between performance and cost. The
maximum budget and the minimum performance are
identified. Below the maximum budget line lie solutions
that meet the definition of “…conducting a program at a
cost constrained by the maximum resources….” The
solutions to the right of the minimum performance line
satisfy the threshold requirement. Thus, in the shaded
rectangle lie the solutions to be considered since they
meet the minimum performance and are less than the
maximum budget. On the curve lay the solutions that are
the “best value,” in the sense that for a given cost the
corresponding point on the curve is the maximum

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

216

Specialty Engineering Activities
Loop until cost targets are met
Need/
threat environment

WBS
Cost

Loop until cost targets and KPPs are met

Loop until cost targets and A are met

Technology

what if the need changes? Or the threat?

Req’s

Design & production
Engineering
tool suite

System capability

Key
performance
parameters
Does it answer the need?

The mission effectiveness trade
space with technology as a driver.
What happens when technology
changes? If the need or the threat
environment changes?
How calculate true cost of system
capability?
How calculate true cost of
operational availability?
How calculate true cost of mission
effectiveness?

Ops
analysis
tool suite

Supportability design

Logistics capability

Operational
availability

Supportablity
tool suite

Fundamental
equation of
sustainment:
A=R*M+S

Mission effectiveness

Figure 10.4 Affordability cost analysis framework. Derived from Bobinis et al. (2010). Reprinted with permission from Joseph
Bobinis. All other rights reserved.

performance that can be achieved. (Note: In the real
world, the curve is rarely smooth or continuous.)
Similarly, for a given performance, the corresponding
point on the curve is the minimum cost for which that
performance can be achieved. Selecting the decision cri­
terion as cost will result in achieving the threshold
performance. Similarly, if the decision criterion is
performance, all of the budget would be expended.
Consequently, to specify affordability for a system or
program requires determining which affordability
element is the basis for the decision criteria and which
elements are being specified as constraints.
Affordability is the result of a disciplined decision‐
making process—requiring systematic methodologies
that support selection of the most affordable technol­
ogies and systems.
10.1.2

Cost‐Effectiveness Analysis

As mentioned in the preceding section, a systems engi­
neer can no longer afford the luxury of ignoring cost as
an SE area of responsibility or as a major architectural

driver. In essence, a systems engineer must be conversant
in business and economics as well as engineering.
Cost‐effectiveness analysis (CEA) is a form of
business analysis that compares the relative costs and
performance characteristics of two or more courses of
action. At the system level, CEA helps derive critical
system performance and design requirements and sup­
ports data‐based decision making.
CEA begins with clear goals and a set of alternatives
for reaching those goals. Comparisons should only be
made for alternatives that have similar goals. A straight­
forward CEA cannot compare options with different
goals and objectives.
Experimental or quasiexperimental designs can be
used to determine effectiveness and should be of a
quality capable of justifying reasonably valid conclu­
sions. If not, there is nothing in the CEA method that will
rescue the results. What CEA adds is the ability to con­
sider the results of different alternatives relative to the
costs of achieving those results. It does not change the
criteria for what is a good effectiveness study. Alternatives
being assessed should address a common specific goal

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Affordability/Cost‐Effectiveness/Life Cycle Cost Analysis

where attainment of that goal can be measured such as
miles per gallon, kill radius, or people served.
CEA is distinct from cost–benefit analysis (CBA),
which assigns a monetary value to the measure of effect.
The approach to measuring costs is similar for both
­techniques, but in contrast to CEA where the results are
measured in performance terms, CBA uses monetary
measures of outcomes. This approach has the advantage
of being able to compare the costs and benefits in
monetary values for each alternative to see if the benefits
exceed the costs. It also enables a comparison among
projects with very different goals as long as both costs
and benefits can be placed in monetary terms.
Other closely related, but slightly different, formal
techniques include cost–utility analysis, economic
impact analysis, fiscal impact analysis, and social return
on investment (SROI) analysis.
In both CEA and CBA, the cost of risk and the risk of
cost need to be included into the study. Risk is usually
handled using probability theory. This can be factored
into the discount rate (to have uncertainty increasing
over time), but is usually considered separately. Particular
consideration is often given to risk aversion—the
irrational preference to avoid loss over achieving gain.
Uncertainty in parameters (as opposed to risk of project
failure) can be evaluated using sensitivity analysis,
which shows how results and cost respond to parameter
changes. Alternatively, a more formal risk analysis can
be undertaken using Monte Carlo simulations. Subject
matter experts in risk and cost should be consulted.
The concept of cost‐effectiveness is applied to the
planning and management of many types of organized
activity. It is widely used in many aspects of life. Some
examples are:
1. Studies of the desirable performance characteris­
tics of commercial aircraft to increase an airline’s
market share at lowest overall cost over its route
structure (e.g., more passengers, better fuel
consumption)
2. Urban studies of the most cost‐effective improve­
ments to a city’s transportation infrastructure (e.g.,
buses, trains, motorways, and mass transit routes
and departure schedules)
3. In health services, where it may be inappropriate
to monetize health effect (e.g., years of life, pre­
mature births averted, sight years gained)

217

4. In the acquisition of military hardware when com­
peting designs are compared not only for purchase
price but also for such factors as their operating
radius, top speed, rate of fire, armor protection,
and caliber and armor penetration of their guns
10.1.3 LCC Analysis
LCC refers to the total cost incurred by a system, or
product, throughout its life. This “total” cost varies by
circumstances, the stakeholders’ points of view, and the
product. For example, when you purchase an automo­
bile, the major cost factors are the cost of acquisition,
operation, maintenance, and disposal (or trade‐in value).
A more expensive car (acquisition cost) may have lower
LCC because of lower operation and maintenance costs
and greater trade‐in value. However, if you are the man­
ufacturer, other costs like development and production
costs, including setting up the production line, need to be
considered. The systems engineer needs to look at costs
from several aspects and be aware of the stakeholders’
perspectives. In some literature, LCC is equated to total
cost of ownership (TCO) or total ownership cost (TOC),
but many times, these measures only include costs once
the systems is purchased or acquired.
Sometimes, it is argued that the LCC estimates are
only to support internal program trade‐off decisions and,
therefore, must only be accurate enough to support the
trade‐offs (relative accuracy) and not necessarily real­
istic. By itself, this is usually a bad practice and, if done,
is a risk element that should be tracked for some resolu­
tion of veracity. The analyst should always attempt to
prepare as accurate cost estimates as possible and
assign risk as required. These estimates are often
reviewed by upper management and potential stake­
holders. The credibility of results is significantly
enhanced if reviewers sense the costs are “about right,”
based on their past experience. Future costs, while
unknown, can be predicted based on assumptions and
risk assigned. All assumptions when doing LCC anal­
ysis should be documented.
LCC analysis can be used in affordability and system
cost‐effectiveness assessments. The LCC is not the
definitive cost proposal for a program since LCC “esti­
mates” (based on future assumptions) are often prepared
early in a program’s life cycle when there is insufficient
detailed design information. Later, LCC estimates should
be updated with actual costs from early program stages

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

218

Specialty Engineering Activities

and will be more definitive and accurate due to hands‐on
experience with the system. A major purpose of LCC
studies is to help identify cost drivers and areas in which
emphasis can be placed during the subsequent substages
to obtain the maximum cost reduction. Accuracy in the
estimates will improve as the system evolves and the
data used in the calculation is less uncertain.
LCC analysis helps the project team understand the
total cost impact of a decision, compare between program
alternatives, and support trade studies for decisions made
throughout the system life cycle. LCC normally includes
the following costs, represented in Figure 10.5:

subsequent production units. For an item produced
with a 90% learning curve, each time the produc­
tion lot size doubles (2, 4, 8, 16, 32, … etc.) the
average cost of units in the lot is 90% of the average
costs of units in the previous lot. A production cost
specialist is usually required to estimate the appro­
priate learning curve factor(s).
•• Utilization and support costs—Typically based on
future assumptions for ongoing operation and
maintenance of the system, for example, fuel costs,
manning levels, and spare parts.
•• Retirement costs—The costs for removing the
system from operation and includes an estimate of
trade‐in or salvage costs. Could be positive or neg­
ative and should be mindful of environmental
impact to dispose.

•• Concept costs—Costs for the initial concept
development efforts. Can usually be estimated
based on average manpower and schedule spans
and include overhead, general and administrative
(G&A) costs, and fees, as necessary.
•• Development costs—Costs for the system
development efforts. Similar to concept costs, can
usually be estimated based on average manpower
and schedule spans and include overhead, G&A
costs, and fees, as necessary.
•• Production costs—Usually driven by tooling and
material costs for large‐volume systems. Labor cost
estimates are prepared by estimating the cost of the
first production unit and then applying learning
curve formula to determine the reduced costs of

Common methods/techniques for conducting LCC analysis
are as follows:
•• Expert judgment—Consultation with one or more
experts. Good for sanity check, but may not be
sufficient.
•• Analogy—Reasoning by comparing the proposed
project with one or more completed projects that
are judged to be similar, with corrections added for
known differences. May be acceptable for early
estimations.
Utilization and support costs

Development costs

Production costs

Costs

Retirement costs
Concept costs

Time

Note: Notional cost profiles, not to scale

Figure 10.5 Life cycle cost elements (not to scale). Derived from INCOSE SEH v1 Figure 9.3. Usage per the INCOSE Notices
page. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Electromagnetic Compatibility

•• Parkinson technique—Defines work to fit the avail­
able resources.
•• Price to win—Focuses on providing an estimate,
and associated solution, at or below the price judged
necessary to win the contract.
•• Top focus—Based on developing costs from the
overall characteristics of the project from the top
level of the architecture.
•• Bottoms up—Identifies and estimates costs for each
element separately and sums the contributions.
•• Algorithmic (parametric)—Uses mathematical
algorithms to produce cost estimates as a function
of cost‐driver variables, based on historical data.
This technique is supported by commercial tools
and models.
•• DTC—Works on a design solution that meet a pre­
determined production cost.
•• Delphi techniques—Builds estimates from multiple
technical and domain experts. Estimates are only as
good as the experts.
•• Taxonomy method—Hierarchical structure or
classification scheme for the architecture.
10.2

Electromagnetic Compatibility

EMC is the engineering discipline concerned with the
behavior of a system in an electromagnetic (EM)
­environment. A system is considered to be electromag­
netically compatible when it can operate without mal­
function in an EM environment together with other
systems or system elements and when it does not add to

Electric and
electromagnetic
environmental
effects analysis

EMC
requirements
(Standards and
specifications)

219

that environment as to cause malfunction to other sys­
tems or system elements. When a system causes interfer­
ence, the term electromagnetic interference (EMI) is
often used. In EMC, the EM environment not only
includes all phenomena and effects that are classically
attributed to electromagnetics (such as radiation) but
also electrical effects (conduction).
Successfully achieving EMC during system
development requires a typical SE process, as shown in
Figure 10.6.
10.2.1.1 Electric and Electromagnetic Environmental
Effects Analysis An electric and electromagnetic envi­
ronmental effects (E4) analysis describes all the threats
(natural and man‐made) that a system may encounter
during its life cycle. MIL‐STD‐464C (DoD, 2010) can
be used to guide this analysis, which should contain all
the information needed to determine EMC requirements
of the system.
10.2.1.2 EMC Requirements (Standards and
Specifications) EMC standards and specifications are
used to regulate the EM environment in which a system
is operating. It usually governs both the system’s ability
to function within its intended EM environment (sensi­
tivity or susceptibility) and its contribution to that envi­
ronment (emissions).
Standards and specifications are available for con­
ducted emissions, conducted susceptibility, radiated
emissions, and radiated susceptibility.
It is rare for a system to have custom‐developed
EMC requirements that do not follow existing standards
and specifications. However, existing standards and

EMC
design and
implementation

EMC
qualification

EMC
engineering
tests
Figure 10.6

Process for achieving EMC. Reprinted with permission from Arnold de Beer. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

220

Specialty Engineering Activities

specifications (whether commercial, military, avionic,
automotive, or medical) classify a requirement into a
class or category depending on the severity of the poten­
tial malfunction. It is a SE function to determine the
correct EMC requirements with class or category
according to the outcome of the E4 analysis.
10.2.3.1 EMC Design and Implementation The EMC
requirements are inputs to the concept and development
stages. It is important that the EMC requirements are
fixed at the beginning of physical design as the EMC
design includes both mechanical and electrical/electronic
hardware implementations that are not part of the other
functional requirements.
For any EMC design, it is best to follow a process of
zoning, where a system is divided into zones that can
easily be managed for EMC. Typically, major system ele­
ments are grouped together in zones that are low in emis­
sions or of similar emissions. Very sensitive circuits
(typically analog/measurement circuits) are grouped
together and protected. The interfaces between zones are
controlled. Where connections interface between zones,
filters are used. Where there is a change in radiated inter­
ference, screening and/or physical separation is employed.
A structured approach to the control of interference
during the design stage of a system is to develop an EMI
control plan. The EMI control plan typically includes all
EMC requirements, zoning strategy, filtering and shield­
ing, cabling, and detail mechanical and electrical design
pertaining to EMC.
10.2.1.4 EMC Engineering Tests Prequalification
tests may be required during the development stage. This
is typically done on a system element level and even as
low as single printed circuit board assembly level. Since
EMC results are difficult to predict, the best way of
ensuring design success is to test at lower system levels
for compliance in order to maximize the probability of
system compliance.
10.2.1.5 EMC Qualification EMC qualification
tests are performed to verify the EMC design of a system
against its requirements. The first part of this activity is
to compile an EMC test plan, which maps each require­
ment to a test and test setup.
The EMC test setup is an integral part of EMC SE as
test results can vary according to the setup. This setup
can be challenging as the system or system element

under test must be in operational mode during emission
testing and it must be possible to detect malfunctions
during susceptibility testing. Interfacing with the system
or system element must be done while not compromising
the EM zone in which it is tested. This may require spe­
cial system‐related EMC test equipment. When it is
impractical to test a large system (such as a ship, aircraft,
or complete industrial plant), the qualification tests of
the system elements are used to qualify the larger system.
10.3 Environmental Engineering/
Impact Analysis
The European Union, the United States, and many other
governments recognize and enforce regulations that
control and restrict the environmental impact that a
system may inflict on the biosphere. Such impacts
include emissions to air, water, and land and have been
attributed to cause problems such as eutrophication,
acidification, soil erosion and nutrient depletion, loss of
biodiversity, and damage to ecosystems (UNEP, 2012).
The focus of environmental impact analysis is on poten­
tial harmful effects of a proposed system’s development,
production, utilization, support, and retirement stages.
All governments that have legally expressed their con­
cern for the environment restrict the use of hazardous
materials (e.g., mercury, lead, cadmium, chromium 6,
and radioactive materials) with a potential to cause
human disease or to threaten endangered species through
loss of habitat or impaired reproduction. Concern
extends over the full life cycle of the system, from the
materials used and scrap waste from the production pro­
cess, operations of the system replacement parts, and
consumables and their containers to final disposal of the
system. These concerns are made evident by the
European Union’s 2006 resolution to adopt a legal
restriction that system developers and their suppliers
retain lifetime liability for decommissioning systems
that they build and sell.
The ISO 14000 series of environmental management
standards (ISO, 2004) are an excellent resource for orga­
nizations of methods to analyze and assess their opera­
tions and their impacts on the environment. Failure to
comply with environmental protection laws carries pen­
alties and should be addressed in the earliest phases of
requirements analysis (Keoleian and Menerey, 1993).
The Øresund Bridge (see Section 3.6.2) is an example of

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Interoperability Analysis

how early analysis of potential environmental impacts
ensures that measures are taken in the design and
construction to protect the environment with positive
results. Two key elements of the success of this initiative
were the continual monitoring of the environmental
status and the integration of environmental concerns into
the requirements from the owner.
Disposal analysis is a significant analysis area within
environmental impact analysis. Traditional landfills for
nonhazardous solid wastes have become less available
within large city areas, and disposal often involves trans­
porting the refuse to distant landfills at considerable
expense. The use of incineration for disposal is often
vigorously opposed by local communities and citizen
committees and poses the problem of ash disposal since
the ash from incinerators is sometimes classified as haz­
ardous waste. Local communities and governments
around the world have been formulating significant new
policies to deal with the disposal of nonhazardous and
hazardous wastes.
One goal of the architecture design is to maximize the
economic value of the residue system elements and min­
imize the generation of waste materials destined for dis­
posal. Because of the potential liability that accompanies
the disposal of hazardous and radioactive materials, the
use of these materials is carefully reviewed and alterna­
tives used wherever and whenever possible. The basic
tenet for dealing with hazardous waste is the “womb‐to‐
tomb” control and responsibility for preventing unautho­
rized release of the material to the environment. This
may include designing for reuse, recycling, or transfor­
mation (e.g., composing, biodegradation).
In accordance with the US and European Union laws,
system developers and supporting manufacturers must
analyze the potential impacts of the systems that they
construct and must submit the results of that analysis to
government authorities for review and approval to build
the system. Failure to conduct and submit the environ­
mental impact analysis can result in severe penalties for
the system developer and may result in an inability to
build or deploy the system. It is best when performing
environmental impact analysis to employ subject matter
experts who are experienced in conducting such assess­
ments and submitting them for government review.
Methods associated with life cycle assessment (LCA)
and life cycle management (LCM) are increasingly
sophisticated and supported by software (Magerholm
et al., 2010). Government acquisitions are subject to

221

legislation for Green Public Procurement (GPP) (Martin,
2010). Consumers of commercial products are offered
assistance in their purchasing decisions through
Environmental Product Declarations and labeling, such
as the Nordic Swan, and Blue Angel (Salzman, 1997).
Another effort in the ISO community is the develop­
ment of a standard for product carbon footprints as an
indicator of the global environmental impact of a prod­
uct expressed in carbon emission equivalents (Draucker
et al., 2011).
10.4

Interoperability Analysis

Interoperability depends on the compatibility of ele­
ments of a large and complex system (which may be an
SoS or a family of systems (FoS)) to work as a single
entity. This feature is increasingly important as the size
and complexity of systems continue to grow. Pushed by
an inexorable trend toward electronic digital systems
and pulled by the accelerating pace of digital tech­
nology invention, commercial firms and national orga­
nizations span the world in increasing numbers. As their
spans increase, these commercial and national organi­
zations want to ensure that their sunken investment in
legacy elements of the envisioned new system is pro­
tected and that new elements added over time will work
seamlessly with the legacy elements to form a unified
system.
Standards have also grown in number and com­
plexity over time, yet compliance with standards
remains one of the keys to interoperability. The stan­
dards that correspond to the layers of the ISO‐OSI
Reference Model for peer‐to‐peer communication sys­
tems once fit on a single wall chart of modest size.
Today, it is no longer feasible to identify the number of
standards that apply to the global communications net­
work on a wall chart of any size. Interoperability will
increase in importance as the world grows smaller due
to expanding communications networks and as nations
continue to perceive the need to communicate seam­
lessly across international coalitions of commercial
organizations or national defense forces.
The Øresund Bridge (see Section 3.6.2) demonstrates
the interoperability challenges faced when just two
nations collaborate on a project, for example, the mesh­
ing of regulations on health and safety and the resolution
of two power supply systems for the railway.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

222

Specialty Engineering Activities

10.5

Logistics Engineering

Logistics engineering (Blanchard and Fabrycky, 2011),
which may also be referred to as product support engi­
neering, is the engineering discipline concerned with the
identification, acquisition, procurement, and provisioning
of all support resources required to sustain operation and
maintenance of a system. Logistics should be addressed
from a life cycle perspective and be considered in all
stages of a program and especially as an inherent part of
system concept definition and development. The
emphasis on addressing logistics in these stages is based
on the fact that (through past experience) a significant
portion of a system’s LCC can be attributed directly to
the operation and support of the system in the field and
that much of this cost is based on design and management
decisions made during early stages of system development.
Furthermore, logistics should be approached from a
system perspective to include all activities associated
with design for supportability, the acquisition and pro­
curement of the elements of support, the supply and
­distribution of required support material, and the mainte­
nance and support of systems throughout their planned
period of utilization.
The scope of logistics engineering is thus (i) to deter­
mine logistics support requirements, (ii) to design the
system for supportability, (iii) to acquire or procure the
support, and (iv) to provide cost‐effective logistics
support for a system during the utilization and support
stages (i.e., operations and maintenance). Logistics engi­
neering has evolved into a number of related elements
such as supply chain management (SCM) in the
commercial sector and integrated logistics support (ILS)
in the defense sector. Further logistics engineering devel­
opments include acquisition logistics and performance‐
based logistics. Logistics engineering is also closely
related to reliability, availability, and maintainability
(RAM) (refer to Section 10.8), since these attributes play
an important role in the supportability of a system.
10.5.1

Support Elements

Support of a system during the utilization and support
stages requires personnel, spares and repair parts, trans­
portation, test and support equipment, facilities, data
and documentation, computer resources, etc. Support
planning starts with the definition of the support and
maintenance concept (in the concept stage) and continues

through supportability analysis (in the development
stage) to the ultimate development of a maintenance plan.
Planning, organization, and management activities are
necessary to ensure that the logistics requirements for
any given program are properly coordinated and imple­
mented and that the following elements of support are
fully integrated with the system:
•• Product support integration and management—
Plan and manage cost and performance across the
product support value chain, from the concept to
retirement stages.
•• Design interface—Participate in the SE process to
impact the design from inception throughout the
life cycle. Facilitate supportability to maximize
availability, effectiveness, and capability at the
lowest LCC. Design interface evaluates all facets of
the product from design to fielding, including the
product’s operational concept for support impacts
and the adequacy of the support infrastructure.
Prior to the establishment of logistics requirements,
logistics personnel accomplish planning, trade‐offs,
and analyses to provide a basis for establishing
support requirements and subsequent resources.
These include support system effectiveness inputs
to the system specifications and goals and
integration of reliability and maintainability
program requirements. Consideration of support
alternatives and design into conceptual programs
must be initiated at this early stage for effective
problem identification and resolution. Logistics
personnel conduct analyses to assist in identifying
potential postproduction support problems and to
contribute to possible LCC and support solutions.
•• Sustaining engineering—This effort spans those
technical tasks (engineering and logistics investiga­
tions and analyses) to ensure continued operation
and maintenance of a system with managed (i.e.,
known) risk. Technical surveillance of critical
safety items, approved sources for these items, and
the oversight of the design configuration baselines
(basic design engineering responsibility for the
overall configuration including design packages,
maintenance procedures, and usage profiles) for the
fielded system to ensure continued certification
compliance are also part of the sustaining engi­
neering effort. Periodic technical review of the

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Logistics Engineering

in‐service system performance against baseline
requirements, analysis of trends, and development
of management options and resource requirements
for resolution of operational issues should be part
of the sustaining effort.
•• Maintenance planning—Identify, plan, fund, and
implement maintenance concepts and requirements
to ensure the best possible system capability is avail­
able for operations, when needed, at the lowest pos­
sible LCC. The support concept describes the support
environment in which the system will operate. It also
includes information related to the system mainte­
nance concept: the support infrastructure, expected
durations of support, reliability and maintainability
rates, and support locations. The support concept is
the foundation that drives the maintenance planning
process. Establish general overall repair policies
such as “repair or replace” criteria.
•• Operation and maintenance personnel—Identify,
plan, fund, and acquire personnel, with the training,
experience, and skills required to operate, maintain,
and support the system.
•• Training and training support—Plan, fund, and
implement a strategy to train operators and main­
tainers across the system life cycle. As part of the
strategy, plan, fund, and implement actions to iden­
tify, develop, and acquire Training Aids, Devices,
Simulators, and Simulations (TADSS) to maximize
the effectiveness of the personnel to operate and
sustain the system equipment at the lowest LCC.
•• Supply support—Consists of all actions, proce­
dures, and techniques necessary to determine
requirements to acquire, catalog, receive, store,
transfer, issue, and dispose of spares, repair parts,
and supplies. This means having the right spares,
repair parts, and all classes of supplies available, in
the right quantities, at the right place, at the right
time, at the right price. The process includes provi­
sioning for initial support, as well as acquiring, dis­
tributing, and replenishing inventories.
•• Computer resources (hardware and software)—
Computers, associated software, networks, and
interfaces necessary to support all logistics functions.
Includes resources and technologies necessary to
support long‐term data management and storage.
•• Technical data, reports, and documentation—
Represents recorded information of scientific or

223

technical nature, regardless of form or character
(such as equipment technical manuals and engi­
neering drawings), engineering data, specifications,
and standards. Procedures, guidelines, data, and
checklists needed for proper operations and mainte­
nance of the system, including:
–– System installation procedures
–– Operating and maintenance instructions
–– Inspection and calibration procedures
–– Engineering design data
–– Logistics provisioning and procurement data
–– Supplier data
–– System operational and maintenance data
–– Supporting databases
•• Facilities and infrastructure—Facilities (e.g.,
buildings, warehouses, hangars, waterways, etc.)
and infrastructure (e.g., IT services, fuel, water,
electrical service, machine shops, dry docks, test
ranges, etc.) required to support operation and
maintenance.
•• Packaging, handling, storage, and transportation
(PHS&T)—The combination of resources,
processes, procedures, design, considerations, and
methods to ensure that all system, equipment, and
support items are preserved, packaged, handled,
and transported properly, including environmental
considerations, equipment preservation for the
short and long storage, and transportability. Some
items require special environmentally controlled,
shock‐isolated containers for transport to and from
repair and storage facilities via all modes of trans­
portation (land, rail, sea, air, and space).
•• Support equipment—Support equipment consists of
all equipment (mobile or fixed) required to sustain
the operation and maintenance of a system. This
includes, but is not limited to, ground handling and
maintenance equipment, trucks, air conditioners,
generators, tools, metrology and calibration equip­
ment, and manual and automatic test equipment.
10.5.2

Supportability Analysis

Supportability analysis is an iterative analytical process
by which the logistics support requirements for a system
are identified and evaluated. It uses quantitative methods
to aid in (i) the initial determination and establishment of

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

224

Specialty Engineering Activities

supportability requirements as an input to design; (ii) the
evaluation of various design options; (iii) the identification,
acquisition, procurement, and provisioning of the various
elements of maintenance and support; and (iv) the final
assessment of the system support infrastructure throughout
the utilization and support stages.
Supportability analysis constitutes a design analysis
process that is part of the overall SE effort. Functional
analysis is used to define all system functions early in the
concept stage and to appropriate levels in the system
hierarchy. The resulting functional breakdown structure,
together with the system requirements and the support
and maintenance concept, provides the starting point of a
supportability analysis as shown in Figure 10.7.
Supportability analysis may include analyses such as
FMECA, fault tree analysis (FTA), reliability block dia­
gram (RBD) analysis, Maintenance Task Analysis
(MTA), RCM, and LORA. Products and activities iden­
tified in Figure 10.7 are described as follows:

•• Physical definition—During system design, the
physical breakdown structure of a system should be
developed to assist in identifying the actual location
of items in the system. This breakdown structure is
used as baseline at various stages throughout the
life cycle of the system, and it should be continu­
ously updated and refined to the required level of
detail.
•• Physical failure analysis—The physical breakdown
structure is used as reference to perform hardware
FMECA and/or FTA and RBD analysis with the
objective of identifying all maintenance tasks for
potential failure modes. The criticalities of failure
modes are used to prioritize corrective and preven­
tive maintenance task requirements.
•• Task identification and optimization—Corrective
maintenance tasks are primarily identified using
FMECA, while preventive maintenance tasks are
identified using RCM. Trade‐off studies may be
required to achieve an optimized maintenance strategy.
•• Detail task analysis—Detail procedures for correc­
tive and preventive maintenance tasks should be
developed, and support resources identified and
allocated to each task. A LORA may be used to
determine the most appropriate location for exe­
cuting these tasks.
•• Support element specifications—Support element
specifications should be developed for all support

•• Functional failure analysis—A functional breakdown
structure is used as reference to perform functional
FMECA and/or FTA and RBD analysis. These
analyses can be used to identify functional failure
modes and to classify them according to criticality
(i.e., severity of failure effects and probability of
occurrence). The functional failure analysis can
also provide valuable system design input (e.g.,
redundancy requirements).

Concept stage

Production
stage

Development stage

Utilization and
support stages

Retirement
stage

Support modeling and simulation
System requirements
Support and maintenance concept
Functional definition

Support
test and evaluation

Functional failure analysis
Physical definition
Physical failure analysis
Task identification and optimization

Recording and corrective action

Detail task analysis
Support element requirements
Support deliverables

Figure 10.7

Supportability analysis. Reprinted with permission from Corrie Taljaard. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Mass Properties Engineering

deliverables. Depending on the system, specifica­
tions may be required for training aids, support
equipment, publications, and packaging material.
•• Support deliverables—All support deliverables
should be acquired or procured based on the individual
specifications. Support element plans describing the
management procedures for the support elements
should also be developed.
•• Support modeling and simulation—RAM and LCC
modeling and simulation are integral parts of sup­
portability analysis that should be initiated during
the early stages to develop an optimized system
design, maintenance strategy, and support system.
•• Support test and evaluation—The support deliver­
ables should be tested and evaluated against both
support element specifications and the overall
system requirements.
•• Recording and corrective action—Failure recording
and corrective action during the utilization and support
stages form the basis for continuous improvement.
System availability metrics should be used to contin­
uously monitor the system in order to improve support
where deficiencies are identified.

10.6 Manufacturing and
Producibility Analysis
The capability to manufacture or produce a system
element is as essential as the ability to properly define
and design it. A designed product that cannot be manu­
factured causes design rework and program delays with
associated cost overruns. For this reason, producibility
analysis and trade studies for each design alternative
form an integral part of the architectural design process.
One objective is to determine if existing proven
processes are satisfactory since this could be the lowest
risk and most cost‐effective approach. The Maglev train
contractor (see Section 3.6.3) experienced a steep
learning curve to produce an unprecedented system
from scientific theory.
Producibility analysis is a key task in developing
low‐cost, quality products. Multidisciplinary teams
work to simplify the design and stabilize the manufac­
turing process to reduce risk, manufacturing cost, lead
time, and cycle time and to minimize strategic or critical
material use. Critical producibility requirements are

225

identified during system analysis and design and
included in the program risk analysis, if necessary.
Similarly, long‐lead‐time items, material limitations,
special processes, and manufacturing constraints are
evaluated. Design simplification also considers ready
assembly and disassembly for ease of maintenance and
preservation of material for recycling. When production
engineering requirements create a constraint on the
design, they are communicated and documented. The
selection of manufacturing methods and processes is
included in early decisions.
Manufacturing analyses draw upon the production
concept and support concept. Manufacturing test consid­
erations are shared with the engineering team and are
taken into account in built‐in test and automated test
equipment.
IKEA® is often used as an example of supply chain
excellence. IKEA® has orchestrated a value creating
chain that begins with motivating customers to perform
the final stages of furniture assembly in exchange for
lower prices and a fun shopping experience. They achieve
this through designs that support low‐cost production
and transportability (e.g., the bookcase that comes in a
flat package and goes home on the roof of a car).
10.7 Mass Properties Engineering
Mass Properties Engineering (MPE) ensures that the
system or system element has the appropriate mass prop­
erties to meet the requirements (SAWE). Mass properties
include weight, the location of center of gravity, inertia
about the center of gravity, and product of the inertia
about an axis.
Typically, the initial sizing of the physical system is
derived from other requirements, such as minimum pay­
load, maximum operating weight, or human factor
restrictions. Mass properties estimates are made at all
stages of the system life cycle based on the information
that is available at the time. This information may range
from parametric equations to a three‐dimensional prod­
uct model to actual inventories of the product in service.
A risk assessment is conducted, using techniques such as
uncertainty analysis or Monte Carlo simulations, to
verify that the predicted mass properties of the system
will meet the requirements and that the system will
operate within its design limits. MPE is conducted at the
end of the production stage to assure all parties that the

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

226

Specialty Engineering Activities

delivered system meets the requirements and then s­ everal
times during the utilization stage to ensure the safety of
the system, system element, or human operator. For a
large project, such as oil platform or warship, the MPE
level of effort is significant.
One trap in MPE is believing that three‐dimensional
modeling tools can be exclusively used to estimate the
mass properties of the system or system element. This is
problematic because (i) not all parts are modeled on the
same schedule and (ii) most parts are modeled neat, that
is, without such items as manufacturing tolerances,
paint, insulation, fittings, etc., which can add from 10 to
100% to the system weight. For example, the liquid in
piping and tanks can weigh more than the structural tank
or metallic piping that contain it.
MPE usually includes a reasonableness check of all
estimates using an alternative method. The simplest
method is to justify the change between the current
estimate and any prior estimates for the same system or
the same system element on another project. Another
approach is to use a simpler estimating method to repeat
the estimate and then justify any difference.

Reliability engineering activities support other SE
processes in two ways. Firstly, reliability engineering
activities should be used to influence system design
(e.g., the system architecture depends on reliability
requirements). Secondly, reliability engineering activ­
ities should be used as part of system verification (e.g.,
system analysis or system test).

10.8 Reliability, Availability,
and Maintainability

The priority emphasis is important, since proactive pre­
vention of failure is always more cost‐effective than
reactive correction of failure. Timely execution of appro­
priate reliability engineering activities is of utmost
importance in achieving the required reliability during
operations.
Traditionally, reliability has been defined as the probability that an item will perform a required function
without failure under stated conditions for a stated
period of time (O’Connor and Kleyner, 2012). The
emphasis on probability in the definition of reliability (to
quantify reliability) resulted in a number of potentially
misleading or even incorrect practices (e.g., reliability
prediction and reliability demonstration of electronic
systems).
Modern approaches to reliability place more emphasis
on the engineering processes required to prevent failure
during the expected life of a system (i.e., failure‐free
operation). The concept of “design for reliability” has
recently shifted the focus from a reactive “test–analyze–
fix” approach to a proactive approach of designing reli­
ability into the system. “Failure mode avoidance”
approaches are aligned with other SE processes and
attempt to improve reliability of a system early in the

To be reliable, a system must be robust—it must avoid
failure modes even in the presence of a broad range of
conditions including harsh environments, changing oper­
ational demands, and internal deterioration (Clausing
and Frey, 2005). Reliability can thus be seen as the proper
functioning of a system during its expected life under the
full range of conditions experienced in the field.
Reliability engineering refers to the specialized engi­
neering discipline that addresses the reliability of a
system during its total life cycle. It includes related
aspects such as availability and maintainability of a
system. Therefore, reliability engineering is often used
as collective term for the engineering discipline
concerned with the RAM of a system.
RAM are important attributes or characteristics of a
given system. However, RAM should not actually be
viewed as characteristics, but rather as nonfunctional
requirements. It is therefore essential that SE processes
should include RAM activities, selected, planned, and
executed in an integrated manner with other technical
processes.

10.8.1

Reliability

The objectives of reliability engineering, in the order of
priority, are (O’Connor and Kleyner, 2012):
•• To apply engineering knowledge and specialist
techniques to prevent or to reduce the likelihood or
frequency of failures
•• To identify and correct the causes of failures that do
occur, despite the efforts to prevent them
•• To determine ways of coping with failures that do
occur, if their causes have not been corrected
•• To apply methods for estimating the likely reliability
of new designs and for analyzing reliability data

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Reliability, Availability, and Maintainability

development stages (Clausing and Frey, 2005). It is
­performed by evaluating system functions, technology
maturity, system architecture, redundancy, design options,
etc. in terms of potential failure modes. The most
significant improvements in system reliability can be
achieved by avoiding physical failure modes in the first
place and not by minor improvements after the system
has been conceived, designed, and produced.
“Design for reliability” implies that reliability should
be specified as a requirement in order to receive adequate
attention during requirements analysis. Reliability require­
ments may be specified either in qualitative or quantitative
terms, depending on the specific industry. Care should be
taken with quantitative requirements, since verification of
reliability is often not practical (especially for high reli­
ability requirements). Also, the misuse of reliability met­
rics (e.g., mean time between failure (MTBF)) frequently
results in “playing the numbers game” during system
development, instead of focusing on the engineering effort
necessary to achieve reliability (Barnard, 2008). For
example, MTBF is often used as an indicator of “average
life” of an item, which may be completely incorrect. It is
therefore recommended that other reliability metrics be
used for quantitative requirements (e.g., reliability (as
­success probability) at a specific time).
10.8.1.1 Development of a Reliability Program Plan
Reliability engineering activities are often neglected
­during system development, resulting in a substantial
increase in risk of project failure or customer dissatisfac­
tion. It is therefore recommended that reliability engi­
neering activities be formally integrated with other SE
technical processes. A practical way to achieve integration
is to develop a Reliability Program Plan at the start of the
project.
Appropriate reliability engineering activities should be
selected and tailored according to the objectives of the
specific project. These activities should be captured in the
Reliability Program Plan. The plan should indicate which
activities will be performed, the planned timing of the
activities, the level of detail required for the activities, and
the persons responsible for execution of the activities.
ANSI/GEIA‐STD‐0009‐2008, Reliability program
standard for systems design, development, and manufacturing, can be referenced for this purpose. This standard
addresses not only hardware and software failures but
also other common failure causes such as manufacturing,
operator error, operator maintenance, training, quality,

227

etc. “At the heart of the standard is a systematic ‘design‐
reliability‐in’ process, which includes three elements:
•• Progressive understanding of system‐level opera­
tional and environmental loads and the resulting
loads and stresses that occur throughout the struc­
ture of the system.
•• Progressive identification of the resulting failure
modes and mechanisms.
•• Aggressive mitigation of surfaced failure modes.”
ANSI/GEIA‐STD‐0009‐2008, which supports a system
life cycle approach to reliability engineering, consists of
the following objectives:
•• Understand customer/user requirements
constraints.
•• Design and redesign for reliability.
•• Produce reliable systems/products.
•• Monitor and assess user reliability.

and

The Reliability Program Plan thus provides a forward‐
looking view on how to achieve reliability objectives.
Complementary to the Reliability Program Plan is the
Reliability Case that provides a retrospective (and docu­
mented) view on achieved objectives during the system
life cycle.
Figure 10.8 indicates a few relevant questions that
may be used to develop a Reliability Program Plan for a
specific project.
10.8.1.2 Reliability Engineering Activities Reliability
engineering activities can be divided into two groups,
namely, engineering analyses and tests and failure analyses.
These activities are supported by various reliability
management activities (e.g., design procedures, design
checklists, design reviews, electronic part derating guide­
lines, preferred parts lists, preferred supplier lists, etc.).
Engineering analyses and tests refer to traditional
design analysis and test methods to perform, for example,
load–strength analysis during design. Included in this
group are finite element analysis, vibration and shock
analysis, thermal analysis and measurement, electrical
stress analysis, wear‐out life prediction, highly acceler­
ated life testing (HALT), etc.
Failure analyses refer to traditional RAM analyses to
improve understanding of cause‐and‐effect relationships

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

228

Specialty Engineering Activities

Objectives of reliability engineering effort?
Any regulatory or contractual requirements?

Early

In which life cycle stage is this item?

Focus on functional activities
Low

Focus on hardware/software activities

Where in the system hierarchy is this item?

More product-level activities
Low

Late

High
More system level activities

What is the technical/financial risk associated with failure of this item?

Less detailed activities

High

More detailed activities

Select reliability engineering activities based on engineering disciplines applicable to this item

Reliability program plan
Figure 10.8 Reliability Program Plan development. Reprinted with permission from Albertyn Barnard. All other rights
reserved.

during design and operations. Included in this group are
Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA), FTA, RBD
analysis, systems modeling and simulation, root cause
failure analysis, etc.
10.8.2

Availability

Availability is defined as the probability that a system,
when used under stated conditions, will operate satisfac­
torily at any point in time as required. Availability is
therefore dependent on the reliability and maintainability
of the system, as well as the support environment during
the utilization and support stages. It may be expressed
and defined as inherent, achieved, or operational avail­
ability (Blanchard and Fabrycky, 2011):
•• Inherent availability (Ai) is based only on the inherent
reliability and maintainability of the system. It
assumes an ideal support environment (e.g., readily
available tools, spares, maintenance personnel) and
excludes preventive maintenance, logistics delay
time, and administrative delay time.

•• Achieved availability (Aa) is similar to inherent
availability, except that preventive (i.e., scheduled)
maintenance is included. It excludes logistics delay
time and administrative delay time.
•• Operational availability (Ao) assumes an actual
operational environment and therefore includes
logistics delay time and administrative delay time.
10.8.3

Maintainability

An objective in systems engineering is to design and
develop a system that can be maintained effectively,
safely, in the least amount of time, at the least cost, and
with a minimum expenditure of support resources without
adversely affecting the mission of that system.
Maintainability is the ability of a system to be maintained,
whereas maintenance constitutes a series of actions to be
taken to restore or retain a system in an effective opera­
tional state. Maintainability must be inherent or “built
into” the design, while maintenance is the result of design.
Maintainability can be expressed in terms of mainte­
nance times, maintenance frequency factors, maintenance

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Resilience Engineering

labor hours, and maintenance cost. Maintenance can be
broken down into corrective maintenance (i.e., unsched­
uled maintenance accomplished, as a result of failure, to
restore a system to a specified level of performance) and
preventive maintenance (i.e., scheduled maintenance
accomplished to retain a system at a specified level of
performance by providing systematic inspection and ser­
vicing or preventing impending failures through periodic
item replacements) (Blanchard and Fabrycky, 2011).
10.8.4 Relationship with Other Engineering
Disciplines
Reliability engineering is closely related to other engi­
neering disciplines, such as safety engineering and logis­
tics engineering. The primary objective of reliability
engineering is prevention of failure. The primary objective
of safety engineering is prevention and mitigation of
harm under both normal and abnormal conditions (see
Section 10.10). The primary objective of logistics engi­
neering is development of efficient logistics support (e.g.,
preventive and corrective maintenance; see Section 10.5).
These three disciplines not only have “failure” as
common theme, but they may also use similar activities,
albeit from different viewpoints. For example, an FMEA
may be applicable to reliability, safety, and logistics
engineering. However, a design FMEA will be different
to a safety or logistics FMEA, due to the different objec­
tives. Common to all disciplines is the necessity of early
implementation during the system life cycle.
While reliability is concerned with failures (or rather
the absence of failures), maintainability refers to the
ability of a system to be maintained (or the ease of main­
tenance). Availability is a function of both reliability and
maintainability and may include logistics aspects (as in
the case of operational availability). The LCC of a system
is highly dependent on reliability and maintainability,
which are considered major drivers in support resources
and related in‐service costs.
10.9

Resilience Engineering

10.9.1 Introduction
The general definition of resilience is “…the act of
rebounding or springing back” (Little et al., 1973). For
engineered systems, as defined in this handbook, resil­
ience has taken on the following meaning (Haimes, 2012):

229

Resilience is the ability to prepare and plan for, absorb
or mitigate, recover from, or more successfully adapt to
actual or potential adverse events.

Although this definition can apply to the resilience of
any engineered system including both physical assets
and humans, early work (Hollnagel et al., 2006) focused
on the resilience of organizational systems. Although
this definition is widely used, some domains, for
example, the military (Richards, 2009), define resilience
to include only the recovery phase of a disruption.
Resilience has taken on a particular importance at a
governmental level (NRC, 2012; The White House,
2010) with the resilience of infrastructure systems being
of the highest priority. Infrastructure systems include
fire protection, law enforcement, power, water, health­
care, transportation, telecommunication, and other sys­
tems. The principles and practices outlined here can
apply to any engineered system. Infrastructure systems
are generally SoS as defined in Section 2.4 and pose a
particular challenge to achieving resilience arising from
the distinctive features of SoS. The SOIs are not limited
to safety‐critical systems. The resilience in question may
apply to the restoration of a service, such as water,
power, healthcare, and so forth. Water, power, and
healthcare may most likely be safety‐critical systems,
contributing to safety functions, such as sprinkling sys­
tems (water), provision of life (health), and power (sup­
porting safety‐critical systems, such as grid, and critical
infrastructure).
10.9.2

Description

Resilience pertains to the anticipation, survival, and
recovery from a variety of disruptions caused by both
human‐made and natural threats. External human‐origi­
nated threats include terrorist attacks. Internal human‐
originated threats include operator and design error.
Natural threats include extreme weather, geological
events, wildfires, and so forth. Threats may be single or
multiple. Threats confronted after the first in a multiple‐
threat scenario may result from attempts to correct for
the initial threat. Multiple threats may also result from
cascading failures, which are common in infrastructure
systems.
Resilience is an emergent and nondeterministic prop­
erty of a system (Haimes, 2012). It is emergent because it
cannot be determined by the examination of individual

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

230

Specialty Engineering Activities

elements of the system. The entire system and the interac­
tion among the elements must be examined. It is nonde­
terministic because the wide variety of possible system
states at the time of the disruption cannot be characterized
either deterministically or probabilistically. Statistical
data analysis (extreme amounts) may allow for probabi­
listic assessment. For example, in reference to Fukushima,
data exist on earthquakes and tsunamis to make a
quantitative prediction. Moreover, data are available on
cooling system configuration and probability of failure
under earthquake and tsunami conditions, making it pos­
sible to evaluate these events on a probabilistic basis.
Because of these emergent and nondeterministic prop­
erties, resilience cannot be measured, nor outcomes of
particular threats be accurately predicted except by itera­
tive analytical trials of threats and system configurations.
The purpose of engineering a resilient system is to
determine the architecture and/or other system charac­
teristics that will anticipate, survive, and recover from a
disruption or multiple disruptions. Figure 10.9 is a model
of a disruption.
Figure 10.9 shows a disruption occurring in three
states: the pre-event initial state, the intermediate states
due to the event, and the post-event final state. The figure
also shows a feedback loop that represents the multiple‐
threat scenario. The ability of a system to accomplish
these desirable outcomes depends on the application of
one or more principles (Jackson and Ferris, 2013). These
principles are abstract, allowing a system developer to
design specific implementations that, in turn, will result
in specific resilience characteristics. Principles can be
either scientifically validated rules or heuristics. The

characterization of these principles at the abstract level
allows them to apply to any domain. The principles must
be invoked during one or more of the phases in the dia­
gram in Figure 10.9. The system developer can only deter­
mine which principles are preferred in a particular
situation by proposing design solutions and modeling
their effect. In addition, it has been determined (Jackson
and Ferris, 2013) that resilience is achieved when the prin­
ciples must be implemented in appropriate combinations.
Hence, the following principle when implemented in the
appropriate combination can be considered an integrated
model of resilience. The system developer can develop
concrete design proposals by following the reasoning that
“an abstraction is a simplified replica of the concrete”
(Lonergan, 1992). The top‐level abstract principles and
their associated dominant characteristics are described in
the following text. Subprinciples to these principles can
be found in the primary source (Jackson and Ferris, 2013).
The engineering of a resilient system is not a separate
discipline. Its principles, listed in the following text, are
recognized in other disciplines, for example, architecture
design, reliability, and safety. Reliability is a key
consideration in safety. They have one thing in common:
the ability to enhance the resilience of an engineered
system. The goal of each principle is to support a
particular attribute or feature of the system that will
enhance resilience. The following principles are listed
according to the attribute they support:
•• Attribute: Capacity—the ability to withstand a threat
–– Absorption: System capable of absorbing design
threat level.

Intermediate events

Initial
state

n...state

n...state

Final state

Initiating event
Figure 10.9 Resilience event model. Reprinted with permission from Scott Jackson. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

System Safety Engineering

–– Physical redundancy: System consists of two or
more identical and independent branches.
–– Functional redundancy: Also called layered
diversity, system consists of two or more differ­
ent and independent branches and is not vulner­
able to common cause failure.
•• Attribute: Buffering—the ability to maintain a distance
from the boundary of unsafe operation or collapse
–– Layered defense: System does not have a single
point of failure.
–– Reduce complexity: System capable of reducing
the number of elements, interfaces, and/or vari­
ability among its elements.
–– Reduce hidden interactions: System capable
of detecting undesirable interactions among its
elements.
•• Attribute: Flexibility—the ability to bend or restructure
–– Reorganization: System capable of restructuring
itself in the face of a threat
–– Repairability: System capable of repairing itself
following a disruption
•• Attribute: Adaptability—the ability to prevent the
system from drifting into unsafe behaviors
–– Drift correction: System capable of detecting
approach­
ing threat and performing corrective
action.
–– Neutral state: System capable of entering neutral
state to allow decisions to be made.
–– Human in the loop: System has human elements
where needed.
–– Loose coupling: System resistant to cascading
failure by slack and delays at the nodes.
•• Attribute: Tolerance—the ability to degrade gracefully
–– Localized capacity: Individual elements of a
system are capable of independent operation fol­
lowing failure of other elements.
•• Attribute: Cohesion—the ability of the elements of
a system to operate together as a system
–– Internode interaction: System has connections
among all its nodes.
Key inputs for resiliency engineering are as follows:
•• Threats: number, type, characteristics
•• Objectives and priorities

231

•• SOI: type and purpose
•• Candidate principles: potentially appropriate for
the SOI
•• Solution proposals
Key outputs for resiliency engineering are as follows:
•• Preferred system characteristics
•• System‐predicted response to selected threats
•• Loss and recovery of function, service, and finan­
cial impact
•• Recovery time
Key activities of the resiliency engineering process are
as follows:
•• Create models, including system characteristics
and threats.
•• Select candidate resilience principles and combinations
of principles appropriate to the relevant scenarios.
•• Select a measure, or measures, of effectiveness.
•• Propose candidate solutions for each principle
including inputs and outputs for each system element.
•• Model threats for a selected range of types and
magnitudes relevant to the scenarios:
–– Identify potential impacts of unanticipated threats.
•• Execute the model for the range of threats and rele­
vant system states.
•• Conduct an impact analysis to determine the loss
and recovery of function, service, or financial
impact of the evaluated system.
10.10

System Safety Engineering

System safety engineering is an applied derivative of SE
that builds upon the fundamentals of good systems
thinking and applies them analytically through each of
the system’s life cycle phases. At the core of system
safety engineering is the analysis of each of requirement,
each system element, and each macro‐to‐micro behavior
within the context of the system being developed, oper­
ated, or sustained to identify and eliminate or control
safety risk potential. Safety risk potential is defined as
any condition that would produce undesired conditions
of the system resulting in damage to the system, harm to

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

232

Specialty Engineering Activities

the humans involved in the operations and support of the
system, or damage to the environment.
The primary objective of system safety engineering is
to influence the design with safety‐related requirements
for the development, production, utilization, support,
and retirement stages of a safe system. The benefits of a
safe system are numerous and include, but not limited to,
the reduction of risk associated with cost, schedule,
operational effectiveness, system availability, and legal
liability.
10.10.1

The Role of SE in System Safety

As today’s systems increase in size and complexity, the
SE approaches used become more critical. System‐level
properties such as safety must be designed into these sys­
tems. They cannot be added on afterward and expected to
be safe. Systems are designed to achieve specific goals to
satisfy the requirements and constraints. SE must develop
a means to organize the engineering design process to
ensure the goals of system safety are included.
SE must embed the system safety engineering effort
into its engineering processes from the beginning such
that safety can be designed into the system as engi­
neering design decisions are made. With respect to
system safety engineering, SE determines the goals of
the system and participates in the identification and doc­
umentation of potential hazards to be avoided. From this
information, a set of system functional requirements,
safety requirements, and constraints can be identified
and documented. These requirements will lay the
foundation for design and operation of the system to
ensure safety is designed into the system. SE must estab­
lish system safety engineering from the early concept
stages and continue this process throughout the life cycle
of the system. SE should ensure design decisions are
guided by safety considerations while taking system
requirements and constraints into account.
10.10.2 Identify and Integrate System
Safety Requirements
System safety engineers review and identify applicable
“best practice” system safety design requirements and
guidelines from federal, military, national, and industry
regulations, codes, standards, and other documents for the
system to be designed and developed (e.g., Federal Motor
Vehicle Safety Standards (FMVSS), Military Standards

(MIL‐STDs), National Electrical Code (NEC), and
Registration, Evaluation, Authorization, and Restriction of
Chemicals (REACH)). These initial requirements are used
to derive additional system safety design requirements that
are provided to design engineers to eliminate or reduce
hazard risks to acceptable levels. These requirements are
integrated into the high‐level system requirements and
design documents. The system safety requirements are
then related to the hazards identified in the system.
System safety engineering, along with SE, ensures
that the system safety design requirements and guide­
lines are developed, refined, completely and correctly
specified, and properly translated into system element
requirements to ensure they are implemented in the
design and development of the system hardware, soft­
ware, and user interface. In addition, applicable safety
requirements are identified for incorporation into proce­
dures, processes, warnings, and cautions for use in the
operator, user, and diagnostic manuals.
10.10.3

Identify, Analyze, and Categorize Hazards

Within the discipline of system safety engineering, there
are numerous analytical methods, techniques, and prod­
ucts that are considered best practice and acceptable
within the industry. For example, SAE International pos­
sesses specific methods defined in SAE ARP 4754 and
4761 that are commonly used within the aviation
industry. The US Department of Defense MIL‐STD‐882
has also defined specific analysis techniques that are use­
ful in the defense domain (DoD, 2010b). Regardless of
the standard or guidance used, the following nonexhaus­
tive list of analysis techniques and safety engineering
artifacts reflects SE best practice:
•• Preliminary hazard analysis (PHA)
•• Functional hazard analysis (FHA)
•• System element hazard analysis (SEHA)
•• System hazard analysis (SHA)
•• Operations and support hazard analysis (O&SHA)
•• Health hazard analysis (HHA)
•• FTA
•• Probabilistic risk assessment (PRA)
•• Event tree analysis (ETA)
System safety engineers begin the identification of
­hazards at the beginning of system concept definition. A

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

System Safety Engineering

hazard analysis is initiated to identify potential hazards
and their mishap potential that may be inherent in the
concepts under consideration. The system safety engi­
neer draws from safety experience on similar systems,
including mishap/incident hazard tracking logs, safety
lessons learned, and design guidelines to develop this
list. As the system matures through the development
cycle, the hazard analysis is updated to identify and ana­
lyze new hazards resulting from design changes.
An in‐depth causal analysis is conducted for each
identified hazard. This analysis identifies all contribu­
tions from hardware, software, and any/all control
entities including the human operator, which could cause
the hazard to occur. The identification of each causal
factor allows the system safety engineer, along with the
systems engineer, to identify specific system safety
requirements/constraints necessary to mitigate the
hazard and reduce the risk to an acceptable level.
Each hazard is analyzed to determine its severity and
probability of occurrence. The hazard’s severity and
probability determine its risk categorization. Table A.I of
MIL‐STD‐882E shows an example of mishap severity
categories (DoD, 2010b), and Table A.II shows mishap
probability levels. Mishap risk classification is per­
formed by using a mishap risk assessment matrix. This
matrix is used to rank the mishap risk potential of the
hazards. Table A.III of MIL‐STD‐882E shows an
example of the mishap risk assessment matrix (DoD,
2010b). This matrix is used to prioritize engineering
efforts to mitigate the system hazards.
Hazards associated with software cannot rely solely
on the hazard probability as identified in Table A.II of
MIL‐STD‐882E (DoD, 2010b). Categorization of a soft­
ware failure is generally determined by its hazard
severity and the degree of command, control, and
autonomy the software functionality exercises over the
hardware. The software control categories include the
following: (i) autonomous control, (ii) software exer­
cises control or displays information allowing time for
intervention by either an independent safety system or an
operator, (iii) software issues commands or generates
information requiring operator action to complete the
control, and (iv) software does not control safety‐critical
hardware or provide safety‐critical information. A soft­
ware criticality index is then established using the
severity categories and the control categories. This
matrix can then be used to prioritize the level of rigor
(LOR) assigned to the design, code, and test of the

233

software. Safety‐significant software is developed to a
specific LOR to bring confidence that the software per­
forms as expected functionally and does not perform
unintended functions.
Hazards are prioritized so that corrective action
efforts can be focused on the most serious hazards first.
The goal of the system safety effort is to work with engi­
neering to design systems that contain no hazards. Since
it is impossible or impractical to design a system com­
pletely free from hazards, the effort is focused on devel­
oping a system design where there are no hazards with
an unacceptable level of mishap risk. Each hazard iden­
tified is analyzed to determine the requirements to be
incorporated into the design to reduce the risk associated
with the hazard to an acceptable level. The system safety
order of precedence is used to define the order followed
for implementing system safety requirements to reduce
the mishap risk. The order of precedence is as follows:
1. Eliminate hazards through design selection.
2. Reduce risk through design alteration.
3. Incorporate safety devices.
4. Provide warning devices.
5. Develop procedures and training.
Best practices dictate a function whose failure to operate
or whose incorrect operation will directly result in a
mishap of either catastrophic (death, permanent total
disability, irreversible significant environmental impact,
or monetary loss equal to or exceeding $10M) or critical
(hospitalization of at least three personnel, reversible
significant environmental impact, or monetary loss equal
to or exceeding $1M but less than $10M). Severity cannot
be mitigated solely through procedural mitigations.
The results of the hazard analysis activities are cap­
tured in a hazard tracking system (HTS). The HTS is
used to track each hazard by documenting the implemen­
tation of the safety requirements, verification results, and
residual mishap risk. The HTS is updated throughout the
life cycle of the system.
10.10.4 Verify and Validate System Safety
Requirements
System safety engineers, along with the systems engi­
neers, provide input to all tests, demonstrations, models,
and inspections to verify compliance of the system with

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

234

Specialty Engineering Activities

the identified system safety requirements. This is done to
ensure the safety of the design is adequately demon­
strated for all hazards not eliminated by design. System
safety engineers typically witness verification/validation
activities for those hazards that were categorized as cat­
astrophic and critical. Results from all test activities per­
formed to validate/verify system safety requirements
are reviewed by system safety engineers and captured in
the HTS as well as the test and evaluation reports on
hardware or software.
10.10.5

Assess Safety Risk

System safety engineers perform and document a com­
prehensive evaluation of the mishap risk being assumed
prior to each key milestone of the program (preliminary
design review, critical design review, program comple­
tion, etc.) as well as key test or operation activities. The
safety assessment identifies all safety features of the
hardware, software, and system design. It also identifies
procedural, hardware, and software related hazards that
may be present in the system at each milestone, test, or
operation activity. Specific procedural controls and pre­
cautions are identified for those hazards still present in
the system. The safety assessment also identifies and
documents hazardous materials used in the design, oper­
ation, or maintenance of the system as well as those that
will be generated by the system. An assessment as to
why non‐ or less hazardous materials could not be used
is developed and documented.
10.10.6

Summary

As an integral part of SE, system safety engineering
focuses heavily on ensuring that the design engineers are
provided a complete set of safety‐related requirements to
minimize the safety risk potential of the system during
the development, production, utilization, support, and
retirement stages. The end objective is to deploy, operate,
and maintain a system that possesses an acceptable
safety risk. The objective is ideally to be accident‐free.
10.11

System Security Engineering

System security engineering is focused on ensuring a
system can function under disruptive conditions associ­
ated with misuse and malicious behavior. System security

engineering involves a disciplined application of SE
principles in analyzing threats and vulnerabilities to sys­
tems and assessing and mitigating risk to the information
assets of the system during its life cycle. It applies a
blend of technology, management principles and prac­
tices, and operational rules to ensure sufficient protec­
tions are available to the system at all times.
System security engineering considers and accounts
for the system and the associated environment. Sources
of potential disruptive conditions (threats) are many and
varied. They may be natural (e.g., weather) or man‐
made. They may emanate from external sources (e.g.,
political or power interruptions) or may be caused by
internal forces (e.g., user or supporting systems). A dis­
ruption may be unintentional or intentional (malicious)
in nature. The security capabilities, whether imple­
mented through design, policy, or practice, must be
usable from the user’s perspective.
To be effective, system security engineering is applied
throughout the life cycle of the system. System security
engineering activities can be applied to each life cycle
stage:
•• Concept—System security engineering explores
technology trends and advancements to identify
potential technologies and promising security strat­
egies to address current and future threats and
support architectural and operational concepts that
provide security to support and protect operational
needs.
•• Development—System security engineering ensures
security concepts are translated into functional with
verifiable requirements and defines security‐level
effectiveness during this stage.
•• Production—System security engineering provides
support during fabrication, build, and assembly to
ensure that security settings are properly initialized
and delivered with the final system and establishes
security‐level effectiveness during this stage.
•• Utilization—System security engineering main­
tains security effectiveness during use by consid­
ering changes in operational, user, and threat
environments.
•• Support—System security engineering ensures that
security features are updated and remain effective
after maintenance and monitors security events to
maintain security effectiveness.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

System Security Engineering

•• Retirement—System security engineering ensures
that effective security practices are employed
during retirement of the system and associated
­
information.
10.11.1 Systems Engineer and System Security
Engineer Roles and Responsibilities
System security engineering brings security‐focused dis­
ciplines, technology, and concerns into the SE process to
ensure that protection considerations are given the proper
weight in decisions concerning the system (Dove et al.,
2013). Systems engineers must employ security subject
matter experts and security engineers on a timely basis to
perform system security analysis and provide effective
security recommendations.
System security engineering consists of subspecialties
such as antitamper, supply chain risk management,
hardware assurance, information assurance, software
assurance, system assurance, and others that the system
security engineer needs to trade off to provide a balanced
system security engineering view. An example of the
relationship of SE and system security engineering to the
security expert domain is illustrated by the joint contri­
bution to defining and deploying an engineering solution
to meet user needs. Some of these joint work products
include:
•• System security plan
•• Vulnerability assessment plan
•• Security risk management plan
•• System security architecture views
•• Security test plan
•• Deployment plan
•• Disaster recovery and continuity plan
10.11.2 System Security Engineering
Activities for Requirements
Stakeholder security interests include intellectual prop­
erty, information assurance, security laws, supply chain
compliance, and security standards. Examples of stan­
dards include ISO/IEC 27002, Information security
standard (2013); Chapter 13 of the Defense Acquisition
Guide (DAU, 2010); and the Engineering for Systems
Assurance Guide (NDIA, 2008). Systems engineers
need to consider stakeholder security interests during

235

the stakeholder needs and requirements definition
p­rocess and should be captured in the stakeholder
requirements.
During system requirements definition, the critical
functions and data are identified that are most in need of
protection. A risk‐based analysis pattern of criticality
analysis, threat assessment, vulnerability assessment,
and identification of potential protection controls and
mitigations are used as inputs to a CBA. The CBA takes
into account impacts to system performance, afford­
ability, and usage compatibility. Security scenarios are
developed for both normal security processing and
misuse/abuse situations to assist with system require­
ments definition. These scenarios are also important for
use during verification and validation.
System requirements definition needs to consider
system security protections. System security protections
can be grouped into three categories: prevention, detec­
tion, and response. Prevention includes access control
and critical function isolation and separation. Detection
includes functions that monitor and log security‐related
behavior. Response includes mitigations that switch to a
degraded mode when the primary function or data has
been compromised.
The results of these activities are a set of system
­security requirements (including process requirements),
security OpsCon and support concept, and a set of sce­
narios to be used for verification and validation.

10.11.3 System Security Engineering for
Architecture Definition and Design Definition
Engagement of system security engineering in the
architecture definition and design definition processes is
important because system architecture enables or impedes
system security. Adversaries learn system protective
measures and change their methods rapidly. Architecture
should enable rapid change of protective measures,
facilitating operational‐time engineering intervention.
­
This is achieved by modifying architectural structure and
security functional detail and is enabled by an agile
­architectural strategy articulated in the system OpsCon.
Evolving threats can be countered with a security
architecture composed of loosely coupled encapsulated
security functional system elements that can be replaced,
augmented with additional functionality, and reconfig­
ured for different interconnections (Dove et al., 2013).

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

236

Specialty Engineering Activities

Long system life expectancies are especially ­vulnerable
to unadaptable, rigid security architectures.
Architecture focuses on the high‐level allocation of
responsibilities between different system elements of
the SOI and defines the interactions and connectivity
­between those system elements. Responsibility for secu­
rity requirements established during the requirements
processes is allocated to functional system elements and
security‐specialty system elements as appropriate during
the architectural design process.
Resilience engineering works closely with system
security engineering. System resilience permits a system
to operate while under, and recover after, attack, perhaps
with degraded performance but with continued delivery
of critical functionality. Resilience is an architectural
feature that is difficult to provide later in the development
life cycle and is very costly after deployment.
Long life systems will have functional upgrades and
system element replacements throughout their life.
Insider threat and supply chain threat may manifest as
system elements developed with embedded malicious
capabilities, which may lie dormant until activated on
demand. This suggests self‐protective system elements
that distrust communications and behaviors of
interconnected system elements, rather than relying on
system perimeter protection or trusted environment
expectations.
10.11.4 System Security Engineering Activities
for Verification and Validation
Verification and validation processes develop strategies
for verifying and validating the SOI. System security
engineering’s involvement is needed for verifying
security‐related requirements and security impacts to
­
enabling systems. Verification methods are identified for
each security requirement with objective pass/fail cri­
teria for inspection, analysis, demonstration, and test.
Milestone reviews are conducted to confirm that mea­
sures have been planned, threat and vulnerability assess­
ments are current, and system security requirements
under test map to a comprehensive criticality analysis.
Validation is performed on systems using assessment
scenarios that focus on evolving threats in operational
environments; risk evaluations and criticality assess­
ments are updated based on current threats and vulnera­
bilities; and end‐to‐end scenarios are updated to address
new vulnerabilities and threats.

10.11.5 System Security Engineering Activities for
Maintenance and Disposal
System security engineering responsibilities do not end
when the system is delivered. As part of maintenance,
work instructions need to indicate authorized mainte­
nance activities to prevent vulnerability insertion. As
part of sustainment operations, threats and security fea­
tures need to be reevaluated to determine if there are new
vulnerabilities in the existing systems. As part of any
capability upgrade or technology refresh, criticality
­analysis must be repeated in the context of new threats,
end‐to‐end scenarios reevaluated to confirm effective
protection, and supply chain vulnerabilities evaluated for
updated equipment. Prior to system disposal, hardware
and software must be brought to a state that cannot be
reverse engineered.
10.11.6 System Security Engineering Activities
for Risk Management
A mission criticality analysis, a threat assessment, and a
vulnerability assessment can be used as security inputs
to the risk management process to improve the objec­
tivity of the risk identification and risk‐level determina­
tion. Balancing security risk reduction within the context
of the overall system performance, cost, and schedule
requires an objective CBA. The earlier the security risk
identification and analysis is done, the more effectively
security can be built into the designs, development pro­
cess, and supply chain. Because of the dynamic innova­
tive nature of threats and the continuous discovery of
vulnerabilities, the risk identification and analysis needs
to be repeated often throughout the system life cycle.
10.11.7 System Security Engineering Activities
for Configuration and Information Management
Configuration and information management ensures that
the state of the system is known in total only to those
authorized to understand its configuration and capability.
Configuration and information management should
allow members of the design team to interact with the
portions of the system they are authorized to see in order
to maintain a consistent and accurate view of the system
as it evolves from concept to delivery. Changes to the
configuration must be controlled to restrict access for
changing the system and documented to provide insight

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Usability Analysis/Human Systems Integration

for forensic analysis in the event of attack or discovery
of vulnerabilities.
10.11.8 System Security Engineering Activities
for Acquisition and Supply
System security considerations go beyond the SOI. The
enabling systems and supply chain must be protected,
and all aspects of assembling a solution must be known.
System security analysis, evaluation, protection imple­
mentation, and updates should be part of the request for
proposal to ensure that the acquired system or system
element is delivered with acceptable risk.
Vulnerability assessments must be made and updated
throughout the life cycle. Hardware and software prod­
ucts that are COTS, while often considered for afford­
ability, may have limited assurance that malicious
insertion has not occurred. COTS products may also be
used outside the SOI, which allows vulnerability dis­
covery that could be exploited against the SOI.
The system security engineer evaluates the
consequence and likelihood of losing business/mission
capability in order to select system elements that have
secure supply chains. In some cases, the best‐performing
COTS system element may not be selected if the supply
chain risk cannot be reduced through countermeasures to
an acceptable level.

10.12

Training Needs Analysis

Training needs analyses support the development of
products and processes for training the users, main­
tainers, and support personnel of a system. Training
analysis includes the development of personnel capabil­
ities and proficiencies to accomplish tasks at any point in
the system life cycle to the level they are tasked. These
analyses address initial and follow‐on training necessary
to execute required tasks associated with system use and
maintenance. An effective training analysis begins with a
thorough understanding of the concept documents and
the requirements for the SOI. A specific list of functions
or tasks can be identified from these sources and repre­
sented as learning objectives for operators, maintainers,
administrators, and other system users. The learning
objectives then determine the design and development of
the training modules and their means of delivery.

237

Important considerations in the design of training
include who, what, under what conditions, how well
each user must be trained, and what training will meet
the objectives. Each of the required skills identified must
be transformed into a positive learning experience and
mapped onto an appropriate delivery mechanism. The
formal classroom environment is rapidly being replaced
with or augmented by simulators, computer‐based
training, Internet‐based distance delivery, and in‐systems
electronic support, to name a few. Updates to training
content use feedback from trainees after they have some
experience to improve training effectiveness.
10.13 Usability Analysis/Human
Systems Integration
Human systems integration (HSI) is the interdisciplinary
technical and management process for integrating human
considerations within and across all system elements.
HSI focuses on the human, an integral element of every
system, over the system life cycle. It is an essential
enabler to SE practice as it promotes a “total system”
approach that includes humans, technology (e.g.
hardware, software), the operational context, and the
necessary interfaces between and among the elements to
make them all work in harmony (Bias and Mayhew,
1994; Blanchard and Fabrycky, 2011; Booher, 2003;
Chapanis, 1996; ISO 13407, 1999; Rouse, 1991). The
“human” in HSI includes all personnel who interact with
the system in any capacity, such as:
• System owners
• Operators
• Maintainers
• Trainers

• Users/customers
• Decision makers
• Support personnel
• Peripheral personnel

Humans are an element of most systems, so many
­systems benefit from HSI application. HSI establishes
human‐centered disciplines and concerns into the SE pro­
cess to improve the overall system design and performance.
The primary objective of HSI is to ensure that human
capabilities and limitations are treated as critical system
elements, regardless of whether humans in the system
operate as individuals, crews, teams, units, or organiza­
tions. The technology elements of the system have
inherent capabilities; similarly, humans possess particular
knowledge, skills, and abilities (KSAs), expertise, and

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

238

Specialty Engineering Activities

cultural experiences. Deliberate design effort is essential
to ensure development of quality interfaces between
technology elements and the system’s intended users,
operators, maintainers, and support personnel in opera­
tional environments. It is also important to acknowledge
that humans outside the system may be affected by its
operation.
While many systems and design engineers intuitively
understand that the human operator and maintainer are
part of the system under development, they often lack the
expertise or information needed to fully specify and
incorporate human capabilities. HSI brings this technical
expertise into the SE process and serves as the focal
point for human considerations in the system concept,
development, production, utilization, support, and retire­
ment stages. The comprehensive application of HSI to
system development, design, and acquisition is intended
to optimize total system performance (e.g., humans,
hardware, and software) while accommodating the char­
acteristics of the population that will use, operate, main­
tain, and support the system and also support efforts to
reduce LCC.
A key method of HSI is trade studies and analyses.
HSI analyses, especially requirements analyses that
include human issues and implications, often result in
insights not otherwise realized. Trade studies that include
human‐related issues are critical to determining the
design that is the most effective, efficient, suitable
(including useful and understandable), usable, safe, and
affordable.
HSI helps systems engineers focus on long‐term costs
since much of that cost is directly related to human
element areas. One example (unfortunately, of many) is
the Three Mile Island power plant nuclear incident in the
United States:
The accident was caused by a combination of personnel
error, design deficiencies, and component failures. The
problems identified from careful analysis of the events
during those days have led to permanent and sweeping
changes in how NRC regulates its licensees—which, in
turn, has reduced the risk to public health and safety.
(NRC, 2005)

Failure to include HSI within a comprehensive SE frame­
work resulted in loss of confidence in nuclear power in
the United States and delayed progress in the field for
almost 30 years. The cleanup costs, legal liability, and

significant resources associated with responding to this
near catastrophe trace directly to lack of attention to the
human element of a highly complex system, resulting in
flawed operations technology and work methods. It also
emphasized that while human performance includes raw
efficiency in terms of tasks accomplished per unit time
and accuracy, human performance directly impacts the
overall system performance.
10.13.1

HSI Is Integral to the SE Process

The foundation for program success is rooted in require­
ments development. Human performance requirements
are derived from and bounded by other performance
requirements within the system. Front‐end analyses
(FEA) generate system requirements and incorporate
HSI‐related requirements. Effective FEA start with a
thorough understanding of the mission of the new system
and the work to be performed, successes or problems
with any predecessor systems, and the KSAs and training
associated with the people who are likely to interact with
the proposed system technology. HSI modeling views
the system as a collection of interrelating elements that
behave according to a shared organizing principle. This
perspective underpins models and simulations with
mathematical rigor approaching that of other engi­
neering disciplines (SEBoK, 2014). It also highlights the
essential HSI truth—there are no unpopulated systems.
Simulation early in the development process, particu­
larly before system hardware and software elements are
developed, ensures all the interfaces are captured for
requirements definition, trade space analysis, and itera­
tive design activities. HSI analyses allocate human‐cen­
tered functions within the system and identify potential
human (or system) capability gaps. For example, humans
excel at solving induction problems, and machines excel
at deduction (Fitts, 1954). The requirement for inductive
or deductive decision making is inherent in the structure
of the system design.
It is critical to include HSI early in system development
(during stakeholder requirements generation) and con­
tinuously through the development process to realize the
greatest benefit to the final system solution and substan­
tial LCC savings. Fully utilizing HSI in IPPD helps
ensure that systems will not require expensive “train‐
arounds” or late‐stage fixes to correct ineffective
usability and operational inefficiencies driven by bad,
unspecified, or undefined human interfaces. The systems

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Usability Analysis/Human Systems Integration

engineer plays a critical role in engaging HSI expertise
to support the IPDTs. A knowledgeable, interdisci­
plinary HSI team is generally required to address the
full spectrum of human considerations, and the systems
engineer is key to ensuring that HSI is included
throughout the system’s life cycle. Program managers,
chief engineers, and systems engineers should ensure
that HSI practitioners are actively participating in
design reviews, working groups, and IPDTs. Consistent
involvement and communications with customers,
users, developers, scientists, testers, logisticians, engi­
neers, and designers (human, hardware, and software)
are essential.
10.13.2 Technical and Management HSI
Processes
HSI must be addressed by all program‐level IPDTs and
at program, technical, design, and decision reviews
throughout the life of the system. HSI influences the
design and acquisition of all systems and system mod­
ifications and makes explicit the role that the human
plays in system performance and cost and how these
factors are shaped by design decisions. In addition,
HSI is one of the essential components of engineering
practice for system development, contributing technical
and management support to the development process
itself.
10.13.2.1 HSI Domains HSI processes facilitate
trade‐offs among interdependent, human‐centered
domains without replacing individual domain activities,
responsibilities, or reporting channels. The human‐cen­
tered domains typically cited by various organizations
may differ in what they are called or in number, but the
human considerations addressed are quite similar. The
following human‐centered domains with recognized
application to HSI serve as a good foundation of human
considerations that need to be addressed in system design
and development, but clearly are not all inclusive:
•• Manpower—Addresses the number and type of
personnel and the various occupational specialties
required and potentially available to train, operate,
maintain, and support the deployed system.
•• Personnel—Considers the type of KSAs, experi­
ence levels, and aptitudes (e.g., cognitive, physical,
and sensory capabilities) required to operate, maintain,

239

and support a system and the means to provide
(e.g., recruit and retain) such people.
•• Training—Encompasses the instruction and resources
required to provide personnel with requisite KSAs to
properly operate, maintain, and support systems. The
training community develops and delivers individual
and collective qualification training programs, plac­
ing emphasis on options that:
–– Enhance user capabilities to include operator,
maintainer, and support personnel
–– Maintain skill proficiencies through continuation
training and retraining
–– Expedite skill and knowledge attainment
–– Optimize the use of training resources
Training systems, such as simulators and trainers,
should be developed in conjunction with the emerg­
ing system technology.
•• Human factors engineering (HFE)—Involves an
understanding of human capabilities (e.g., cognitive,
physical, sensory, and team dynamic) and compre­
hensive integration of those capabilities into system
design beginning with conceptualization and
continuing through system disposal. A key objective
for HFE is to clearly characterize the actual work to
be performed and then use this information to cre­
ate effective, efficient, and safe human/hardware/
software interfaces to achieve optimal total system
performance. This “optimal performance” is the
achievement of the following:
–– Conducting task analyses and design trade‐off
studies to optimize human activities, creating
workflow
–– Making the human goals and performance the
design driver to assure an intuitive system for
humans who will use, operate, maintain, and
support it
–– Providing deliberately designed primary, secondary,
backup, and emergency tasks and functions
–– Meeting or exceeding performance goals and
objectives established for the system
–– Conducting analyses to eliminate/minimize the
performance and safety risks leading to task errors
and system mishaps across all expected opera­
tional, support, and maintenance environments
HFE uses task and function analyses (including
cognitive task analysis) supported by increasingly

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

240

Specialty Engineering Activities

sophisticated tools and methods to define system
functions and interfaces. These efforts should rec­
ognize the increasing complexity of technology and
the associated demands on people, giving careful
consideration to the capabilities and limitations of
humans. The design should not demand unavail­
able or unachievable skills. HFE seeks to maximize
usability for the targeted range of users/cus­
tomers and to minimize design characteristics that
induce frequent or critical errors. HSI/HFE tools
provide data that can be directly incorporated into
system design elements such as the information
architecture.
HFE works with the IPDTs to ensure that represen­
tative personnel are tested in situations to determine
whether the human can operate, maintain, and
support the system in adverse environments while
working under the full range of anticipated mission
stress and endurance conditions.
•• Environment—In the context of HSI, this domain
involves environmental considerations that can
affect operations and requirements, particularly
human performance.
•• Safety—Promotes system design characteristics
and procedures to minimize the risk of accidents or
mishaps that cause death or injury to operators,
maintainers, and support personnel; threaten the
operation of the system; or cause cascading failures
in other systems. Prevalent issues include the
following:
–– Factors that threaten the safety of personnel and
their operation of the system
–– Walking/working surfaces, emergency egress
pathways, and personnel protection devices
–– Pressure and temperature extremes
–– Prevention/control of hazardous energy releases
(e.g., mechanical, electrical, fluids under
pressure, ionizing or nonionizing radiation, fire,
and explosions)
•• Occupational health—Promotes system design
features and procedures that serve to minimize the
risk of injury, acute or chronic illness, and disability
and to enhance job performance of personnel who
operate, maintain, or support the system. Prevalent
issues include the following:
–– Noise and hearing protection
–– Chemical exposures and skin protection

–– Atmospheric hazards (e.g., confined space entry
and oxygen deficiency)
–– Vibration, shock, acceleration, and motion
protection
–– Ionizing/nonionizing radiation and personnel
protection
–– Human factors considerations that can result in
chronic disease or discomfort (e.g., repetitive motion
injuries or other ergonomic‐related problems)
•• Habitability—Involves characteristics of system
living and working conditions, such as the following:
–– Lighting and ventilation
–– Adequate space
–– Availability of medical care, food, and/or drink
services
–– Suitable sleeping quarters, sanitation and
personal hygiene facilities, and fitness/recreation
facilities
•• Survivability—Addresses human‐related character­
istics of a system (e.g., life support, body armor,
helmets, plating, egress/ejection equipment, air­
bags, seat belts, electronic shielding, alarms, etc.)
that reduce susceptibility of the total system to
mission degradation or termination, injury or loss
of life, and partial or complete loss of the system or
any of its elements.
The domains outlined above must be considered simulta­
neously since decisions made in one domain can have
significant impacts on other domains. Each individual
domain decision generates the need to concurrently
assess HSI issues across all the domains and against
mission performance, prior to making formal program­
matic decisions. This approach mitigates the potential
for unintended, adverse consequences, including
increased technical risk and cost.
10.13.2.2 Key HSI Activities and Tenets HSI pro­
grams have distilled the following HSI activities and
associated key actionable tenets:
•• Initiate HSI early and effectively—HSI should
begin in early system concept development with
FEA and requirements definition.
HSI‐related requirements include not just those of
the individual domains but also those that arise
from interactions among the HSI domains.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Value Engineering

241

HSI requirements must be developed in conso­
•• Execute integrated technical processes—HSI
nance with other system requirements and consider
domain integration begins in early system concept
any constraints or capability gaps and must be
development with FEA and requirements definition
reconsidered, refined, and revised as program docu­
and continues through development, operations,
ments and system requirements are updated. The
sustainment, modification, and all the way to even­
human considerations identified in the requirements
tual system disposal.
must address the capabilities and limitations of
HSI activities and considerations must be included
users, operators, maintainers, and other personnel as
in each key project planning document (e.g., acquisi­
they interact with and within the system. Doing this
tion strategy, SEMP, test plan, verification, etc.) and
early, continuously, and comprehensively as part of
in the system architectural framework.
the SE process provides the opportunity to identify
Systems engineers and HSI personnel must be pre­
risks and costs associated with program decisions.
pared to exchange technical data and to present
HSI should be conducted by professionals who are
accurate, integrated cost data whenever possible to
trained in the domains outlined earlier, who are
demonstrate reduced LCC, thereby justifying trade‐
resourced with appropriate tools, and who have
off decisions that may increase design and acquisi­
access to data from other concurrent IPDT activities.
tion costs.
•• Identify issues and plan analysis—Projects/­
•• Conduct proactive trade‐offs—In conducting trade‐
programs must identify HSI‐related issues that
off analyses both within HSI domains and across
require analysis to ensure thorough consideration.
the system, the primary goal is to ensure the system
meets or exceeds the performance requirements
The systems engineer must have a comprehensive
without compromising survivability, environment,
plan for HSI early in the acquisition process and sum­
safety, occupational health, and habitability.
marize HSI planning in the acquisition strategy. This
plan can be stand‐alone or integrated into the SEMP
•• Conduct HSI assessments—The purpose of the HSI
and include details associated with the analyses in SE
assessment process is to evaluate the application of
language to support HSI trade‐offs. Systems engi­
HSI principles throughout the system life cycle.
neers should address HSI throughout the entire acqui­
The process enables cross‐discipline HSI collabo­
sition cycle as part of the SE process.
ration in acquisition program evaluations and pro­
vides an integral avenue for HSI issue identification
Efficient, timely, and effective planning/­
and resolution.
replanning and FEA are the cornerstones of HSI
HSI assessment should be initiated early in the
efforts, ensuring human considerations are effec­
system life cycle and addressed throughout the
tively integrated into capability requirements, system
system development process, particularly in SE
concept development, and acquisition. HSI FEA
technical reviews and during working group meet­
establishes and assesses criteria for success and helps
ings, design reviews, logistical assessments, verifi­
determine when a system design change is required.
cation, and validation.
•• Document HSI requirements—Systems engineers
HSI assessments should be based on sound data
derive HSI requirements, as needed at each level of the
collection
and analyses. Deficiencies should be
system hierarchy, using HSI plans, analyses, and
captured
and
include a detailed description of the
reports as sources (or rationale) for the derived require­
deficiency,
its
operational impact, recommended
ments.HSI requirements should be cross‐referenced
corrective
action,
and current status.
with other documents, plans, and reports and captured
in the requirements traceability documents and main­
tained in system requirements databases in the same
manner as all other system requirements.
10.14 Value Engineering
•• Make HSI a factor in source selection for contracted development efforts—HSI requirements
VE, value management (VM), and value analysis (VA)
must be explicit in source selection planning and
are all terms that pertain to the application of the VE pro­
implementation with adequate priority in the SOW.
cess (Bolton et al., 2008; Salvendy, 1982; SAVE, 2009).

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

242

Specialty Engineering Activities

This chapter discusses how VE supports, compliments,
and “adds value” to the SE discipline.
VE originated in studies of product changes resulting
from material shortages during World War II. During
that period, materials identified in designs were substi­
tuted without sacrificing quality and performance.
Lawrence D. Miles noticed this success and developed a
formal methodology to utilize teams to examine the
function of products manufactured by General Electric.
VE uses a systematic process (e.g., a formal job plan),
VE‐certified facilitators/team leads, and a multidisci­
plinary team approach to identify and evaluate solutions
to complex problems in the life cycle of a project, pro­
cess, or system. The VE process utilizes several industry
standard problem‐solving/decision‐making techniques
in an organized effort directed at independently ana­
lyzing the functions of programs, projects, organiza­
tions, processes, systems, equipment, facilities, services,
and supplies. The objective is to achieve the essential
functions at the lowest LCC consistent with required
performance, reliability, availability, quality, and safety.
VE is not a cost reduction activity but a function‐­oriented
method to improve the value of a product. There is no
limit to the field in which VE may be applied.
The objective of performing VE is to improve the eco­
nomical value of a project, product, or process by review­
ing its elements to accomplish the following:
•• Achieve the essential functions and requirements
•• Lower total LCC (resources)
•• Attain the required performance, safety, reliability,
quality, etc.
•• Meet schedule objectives
Value is defined as a fair return or the equivalent in
goods, services, or money for something exchanged. In
other words, value is based on “what you get” relative to
“what it cost.” It is represented by the relationship:
Value function / cost
Function is measured by the requirements from the
stakeholder. Cost is calculated in the materials, labor,
price, time, etc., required to accomplish that function.
According to the Society of American Value Engineers
(SAVE) International, to qualify as a value study, the fol­
lowing conditions must be satisfied:

•• The value study team follows an organized, six‐
phase VE job plan (see following text) and per­
forms function analysis.
•• The value study team is a multidisciplinary group,
chosen based on their expertise.
•• The value study team leader (i.e., facilitator) is
trained in the value methodology.
10.14.1

Systems Engineering Applicability

VE supports the various aspects and techniques of SE as
well as being a comprehensive approach to SE project
initiation. VE is implemented through a systematic,
rational process consisting of a series of team‐based
techniques, including:
•• Mission definition, strategic planning, or problem‐
solving techniques to determine current and future
states. High‐level requirements definition can be
initiated in these processes.
•• Functional analysis to define what a system or
system element does or its reason for existence.
This technique serves as the basis or structure for
technical,
functional,
and/or
operational
requirements.
•• Innovative, creative, or speculative techniques to
generate new alternatives. Trade studies are often
defined in VE workshops from the more “viable”
alternatives. Time can be given to conduct in‐depth
analyses, such as feasibility studies, cost estimates,
etc. The VE workshop can then be reconvened (e.g.,
1–6 months later) to determine the preferred
alternative.
•• Evaluation techniques to select preferred alterna­
tives. These range in complexity from completely
subjective to quantitative, depending on the LOR
and justification required.
VE can be used to effectively and efficiently initiate an
SE project. The team approach brings the customer and
other stakeholders together along with engineering,
planning, finance, marketing, etc. so that the strategic
elements of the project can be discussed or developed.
Stakeholder needs can be identified and established as
requirements. Functions are brainstormed and alterna­
tives developed. In general, the boundaries of the scope
of work are identified and clarified with all affected

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Value Engineering

groups. The SE effort can then proceed with initial
planning already established and stakeholder input
integrated. Some of the uses and benefits of VE include:
•• Clarify objectives
•• Solve problems (obtain “buy‐in” to solution)
•• Improve quality and performance
•• Reduce costs and schedule
•• Assure compliance
•• Identify and evaluate additional concepts and
options
•• Streamline and validate processes and activities
•• Strengthen teamwork
•• Reduce risks
•• Understand customer requirements
10.14.2

VE Job Plan

The VE process uses a formal job plan, which is a scientific
method of problem solving that has been optimized over
the last 50 years. The premise of VE is to use a beginning‐
to‐end process that analyzes functions in such a way that
creates change or value‐added improvement in the end. A
typical six-phase VE job plan is as follows:
•• Phase 0: Preparation/planning—Plan the scope of
the VE effort.
•• Phase 1: Information gathering—Clearly identify
the problem(s) to be solved or the objective of the
work scope. This includes gathering background
information pertinent to meeting the objective and
identifying and understanding customer/stake­
holder requirements and needs.
•• Phase 2: Functional analysis—Define the project
functions using an active verb and measurable noun
and then review and analyze the functions to deter­
mine which are critical, need improvements, or are
unwanted. Several techniques can be used to
enhance functional analysis. Functions can be orga­
nized in a WBS, in a Function Analysis System
Technique (FAST) diagram (discussed in the fol­
lowing text), or in a flow diagram.
Functions can be assigned a cost. Depending on
the objective of the VE study, determining the cost/
function relationships is one method to identify
where unnecessary costs exist within the scope of

243

the study. Other ­criteria to identify those areas need­
ing improvement are personnel, environmental
safety, quality, reliability, construction time, etc.
Cost/function relationships provide direction for the
team related to areas that provide the greatest oppor­
tunity for cost improvement and the greatest bene­
fits to the project. This can be captured in a cost/
function worksheet.
•• Phase 3: Creativity—Brainstorm different ways to
accomplish the function(s), especially those that are
high cost or low value.
•• Phase 4: Evaluation—Identify the most promising
functions or concepts. The functions can also be
used in this phase to generate full alternatives that
accomplish the overall objective. Then the alterna­
tives can be evaluated using the appropriate struc­
tured evaluation technique.
•• Phase 5: Development—Develop the viable ideas
into alternatives that are presented to decision
makers to determine the path forward. Alternatively,
the full alternatives that were evaluated in Phase 4
can be further developed into proposals, which may
include rough‐order‐of‐magnitude cost, estimated
schedule, resources, etc.
•• Phase 6: Presentation/implementation—It may be
desirable to present the alternatives/proposals to
management or additional stakeholder for final
direction. This is where the implementation plan
concepts are identified and a point of contact
assigned to manage the actions.
10.14.3

FAST Diagram

The FAST diagramming technique was developed in
1964 by Charles W. Bytheway to help identify the depen­
dencies and relationships between functions. A FAST dia­
gram (see Fig. 10.10) is not time oriented like a Program
Evaluation Review Technique (PERT) chart or flowchart.
It is a function‐oriented model that applies intuitive logic
to verify the functions that make up the critical path.
There are several different types of FAST diagrams as
well as varying levels of complexity. The purpose is to
develop a statement of the function (verb and noun) for
each part or element of the item or process under study.
Functions are classified as basic and secondary. The crit­
ical path is made up of the main functions within the
scope of the activity or project. The basic function is

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

244

Specialty Engineering Activities

Waste retrieval
All the time
functions

Design objectives
Contain
contamination

How

Minimize cross
contamination

Meet regulatory
requirements

Minimize impacts
to treatment
facility

Output or higher
order function
Critical
path

Basic function

Retrieve
material

Excavate
material

Confine
hazard

Meet
regulations

Generate
dust

Filter air

Transport
material

Spray soil

Stabilize
waste (not
removed)

Stage
material

Construct
confinement

Design
confinement

Install under
burden

Critical
path

Model/
analyze
retrieval
method

Segregate
material
Generate
dust
Unwanted function
Note: ‘when’ functions are not displayed in order of completion.

Scope line

Scope line

Input or causative
function

When functions

When functions

Comply with
state
regulations

Why

Protect personnel

Figure 10.10 Sample Function Analysis System Technique (FAST) diagram. Reprinted with permission from Doug Hamelin.
All other rights reserved.

typically the deliverable or end state of the effort. The
higher‐order function is the ultimate goal and is the
answer to “why” the basic function is performed.
Functions that “happen at the same time” or “are caused
by” some function on the critical path are known as
“when” functions and are placed below the critical path
functions. Functions that happen “all the time,” such as
safety, aesthetic functions, etc., are placed above the
critical path functions.
Unwanted functions are noted by a double lined box.
They are not essential to the performance of the scope, but
are a consequence of the selected design solution. Limiting
unwanted functions and minimizing the cost of basic/criti­
cal path functions result in an item of “best value” that is
consistent with all performance, reliability, quality, main­
tainability, logistics support, and safety requirements.
There is no “correct” FAST model; team discussion
and consensus on the final diagram is the goal. Using a

team to develop the FAST diagram is beneficial for sev­
eral reasons:
•• Applies intuitive logic to verify functions
•• Displays functions in a diagram or model
•• Identifies dependence between functions
•• Creates a common language for team
•• Tests validity of functions
10.14.4 VE Certification
A Certified Value Professional should be used to facili­
tate VE workshops. They have the training and experi­
ence to manage a team, implement the methodology, and
maximize the benefits to the customer.
The Certification Program is composed of two
major elements: individual professional certification and

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Value Engineering

educational program approval. The highest level is the
Certified Value Specialist (CVS), which is recognition of
the individual who has met all certification requirements,
both technical and experience, and whose principal
career is VE.
The Associate Value Specialist (AVS) program recog­
nizes those individuals who have decided to become
professional value engineers but who have not yet
acquired all the experience or technical skills expected
of a CVS. The Value Methodology Practitioner (VMP)
program was established to recognize those individuals
who acquired the basic skills of VE/VA but their principal
career is not VE.
The CVS and VMP must recertify every 4 years.
Although considered an entry‐level certification, the
AVS may be maintained indefinitely as long as all

245

certification maintenance fees are paid. Membership in
the SAVE is not a requirement for individual certification
or for educational program approval.
10.14.5

Conclusion

VE is a best business practice. Projects that use VE in the
early life cycle stages have shown high rates of success.
A VE study is more rigorous than the typical project
review. Each VE study brings together an impartial and
independent team of technical experts with a common
purpose of improving and optimizing the project’s value.
VE is seen as a systematic and creative approach for
increasing the “return on investment” in systems, facil­
ities, and other products. For more information on VE,
consult the website of the SAVE International (2009).

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Appendix a: References

Achenbach, J. (2009). Mars Mission Has Some Seeing Red.
The Washington Post, 11 February 2009.
Adams, J. L. (1990). Conceptual Blockbusting, 3rd Ed. San
Francisco, CA: San Francisco Book Company, Inc.
Alavi, M., & Leidner, D. E. (1999). Knowledge Management
Systems: Issues, Challenges, and Benefits. Communications
of the AIS, 1(2).
Albright, D., Brannan, P., & Walrond, C. (2010). Did Stuxnet
Take Out 1,000 Centrifuges at the Natanz Enrichment
Plant? Washington, DC: Institute for Science and
International Security. Retrieved from http://isis-online.org/
isis-reports/detail/did-stuxnet-take-out-1000-centrifuges-atthe-natanz-enrichment-plant/ (accessed January 26, 2015).
Albright, D., Brannan, P., & Walrond, C. (2011). Stuxnet Malware
and Natanz: Update of ISIS December 22, 2010 Report.
Institute for Science and International Security. Retrieved
from http://isis‐online.org/uploads/isis‐reports/documents/­
stuxnet_update_15Feb2011.pdf (accessed October 24, 2014).
ANSI/AIAA G‐043A. (2012). Guide to the Preparation of
Operational Concept Documents. Reston, VA: American
National Standards Institute/American Institute of
Aeronautics and Astronautics.
ANSI/EIA 632. (2003). Processes for Engineering a System.
Arlington, VA: American National Standards Institute/
Electronic Industries Association.

ANSI/EIA 649B. (2011). Configuration Management Standard.
TechAmerica.
ANSI/GEIA‐STD‐0009. (2008). Reliability Program Standard
for Systems Design, Development, and Manufacturing.
American National Standards Institute/Government Electronic
Industries Association.
Arnold, S., & Lawson, H. (2003). Viewing Systems from a
Business Management Perspective: The ISO/IEC 15288
Standard. Systems Engineering, 7(3), 229–42.
ARP 4754A. (2010). Guidelines for Development of Civil
Aircraft and Systems. Warrendale, PA: SAE International.
Ashby, W. R. (1956). Introduction to Cybernetics. London,
UK: Methuen.
ASQ. (2007). Quality Progress. In Quality Glossary. Milwaukee,
WI: American Society for Quality Control.
AT&T. (1993). AT&T Engineering Guides for Managing Risk.
TX: McGraw‐Hill.
Barnard, R. W. A. (2008). What Is Wrong with Reliability
Engineering? Proceedings of the 18th Annual INCOSE
International Symposium. Utrecht, the Netherlands:
International Council on Systems Engineering.
Barton, T. L., Shenkir, G., & Walker, P. L. (2002). Making
Enterprise Risk Management Pay Off: How Leading
Companies Implement Risk Management. Upper Saddle

INCOSE Systems Engineering Handbook: A Guide for System Life Cycle Processes and Activities, Fourth Edition.
Edited by David D. Walden, Garry J. Roedler, Kevin J. Forsberg, R. Douglas Hamelin and Thomas M. Shortell.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

246

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Appendix a: References

River, NJ: Financial Times/Prentice Hall PTR/Pearson
Education Company.
BBC. (2002). China’s Supertrain Takes to Tracks. Retrieved
from BBC News World Edition: Asia‐Pacific: http://news.
bbc.co.uk/2/hi/asia‐pacific/2182975.stm (accessed May 29,
2003).
Beck, K., Beedle, M., van Bennekum, A., Cockburn, A.,
Cunningham, W., Fowler, M., … Thomas, D. (2001).
Manifesto for Agile Software Development. Retrieved from
http://agilemanifesto.org (accessed October 24, 2014).
Becker, O., Ben‐Ashe, J., & Ackerman, I. (2000). A Method for
Systems Interface Reduction Using N2 Charts. Systems
Engineering, Systems Engineering, 3(1), 27–37.
Beer, S. (1959). Cybernetics and Management. New York, NY:
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Bellinger, G. (2013). Systems Thinking World. Retrieved from
http://www.systemswiki.org/ (accessed October 24, 2014).
von Bertalanffy, L. (1950). The Theory of Open Systems in
Physics and Biology. Science, 111(2872), 23–9.
von Bertalanffy, L. (1968). General System Theory: Foundations,
Development, Applications. New York, NY: Braziller.
Bias, R. G., & Mayhew, D. J. (1994). Cost Justifying Usability.
Boston, MA: Academic Press.
Blanchard, B., & Fabrycky, W. (2011). Systems Engineering
and Analysis, 5th Ed. Boston, MA: Prentice Hall.
Boardman, J., & Sauser, B. (2008). Systems Thinking—Coping
with 21st Century Problems. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Bobinis, J., Dean, E., Mitchell, T., & Tuttle, P. (2010). INCOSE
Affordability Working Group Mission. 2010 ISPA/SCEA
Joint Annual Conference & Training Workshop Proceedings.
Society for Cost Estimating and Analysis.
Bobinis, J., Haimowitz, J., Tuttle, P., Garrison, C., Mitchell, T., &
Klingberg, J. (2013). Affordability Considerations: Cost
Effective Capability. Proceedings of the 23rd Annual INCOSE
International Symposium. Philadelphia, PA: International
Council on Systems Engineering.
Boehm, B. (1986), A Spiral Model of Software Development
and Enhancement. ACM SIGSOFT Software Engineering
Notes, ACM, 11(4), 14–24.
Boehm, B. (1996). Anchoring the Software Process. Software,
13(4), 73–82.
Boehm, B., & Lane, J. (2007). Using the Incremental Commitment
Model to Integrate System Acquisition, Systems Engineering,
and Software Engineering. CrossTalk, 20, 4–9.
Boehm, B., & Turner, R. (2004). Balancing Agility and
Discipline. Boston, MA: Addison‐Wesley.
Boehm, B., Lane, J., Koolmanojwong, S., & Turner, R. (2014).
The Incremental Commitment Spiral Model: Principles and
Practices for Successful Systems and Software. Boston,
MA: Addison‐Wesley Professional.

247

Bogdanich, W. (2010, January 23). Radiation Offers New
Cures, and Ways to Do Harm. The New York Times.
Bolton, J. D., Gerhardt, D. J., Holt, M. P., Kirk, S. J., Lenaer, B. L.,
Lewis, M. A., … Vicers, J. R. (2008). Value Methodology:
A Pocket Guide to Reduce Cost and Improve Value through
Function Analysis. Salem, NH: GOAL/QPC.
Booher, H. R. (Ed.). (2003). Handbook of Human Systems
Integration. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Brenner, M. J. (n.d.). TQM, ISO 9000, Six Sigma: Do Process
Management Programs Discourage Innovation? Retrieved
from Knowledge@Wharton, University of Pennsylvania:
http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/tqmiso-9000-six-sigma-do-process-management-programsdiscourage-innovation/ (accessed January 26, 2015).
Briedenthal, J., & Forsberg, K. (2007). Organization of
Systems Engineering Plans According to Core and Off‐
Core Processes. Pasadena, CA: California Institute of
Technology, Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
Brykczynski, D. B., & Small, B. (2003). Securing Your
Organization’s Information Assets. CrossTalk, 16(5), 12–6.
Buede, D. M. (2009). The Engineering Design of Systems:
Models and Methods (2nd Ed). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley &
Sons, Inc.
Carpenter, S., Delugach, H., Etzkorn, L., Fortune, J., Utley, D., &
Virani, S. (2010). The Effect of Shared Mental Models
on Team Performance. Industrial Engineering Research
Conference. Cancun, Mexico: Institute of Industrial Engineers.
Carson, R. (2013). Can Systems Engineering be Agile?
Development Lifecycles for Systems, Hardware, and
Software. Proceedings of the 23rd Annual INCOSE
International Symposium. Philadelphia, PA: International
Council on Systems Engineering.
Carter, A. (2011). Better Buying Power: Mandate for Restoring
Affordability and Productivity in Defense Spending.
Memorandum for Defense Acquisition and Logistics
Professionals. Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition,
Technology, and Logistics.
Chang, C. M. (2010). Service Systems Management and
Engineering: Creating Strategic Differentiation and Operational
Excellence. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Chapanis, A. (1996). Human Factors in Systems Engineering.
New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Chase, W. P. (1974). Management of System Engineering. New
York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Checkland, P. (1975). The Origins and Nature of Hard Systems
Thinking. Journal of Applied Systems Analysis, 5(2), 99–110.
Checkland, P. (1998). Systems Thinking, Systems Practice.
Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Christensen, C. M. (2000). The Innovator’s Dilemma. New York,
NY: HarperCollins Publishers.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

248

Appendix a: References

Churchman, C. W., Ackoff, R. L., & Arnoff, E. L. (1950).
Introduction to Operations Research. New York, NY: John
Wiley & Sons, Inc.
CJCS. (2012). CJCSI 3150.25E, Joint Lessons Learned
Program. Washington, DC: Office of the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Clausing, D., & Frey, D. D. (2005). Improving System Reliability
by Failure Mode Avoidance including Four Concept Design
Strategies. Systems Engineering, 8(3), 245–61.
Cloutier, R., DiMario, M., & Pozer, H. (2009). Net Centricity
and Systems of Systems. In M. Jamshidi, (Ed.), Systems of
Systems Engineering. Wiley Series in Systems Engineering.
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press/Taylor & Francis Group.
CMMI Product Team. (2010). Capability Maturity Model
Integration, Version 1.3 (CMU/SEI‐2010‐TR‐033).
Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon University.
Retrieved from CMMI Institute: http://cmmiinstitute.com
(accessed October 24, 2014).
Cockburn, A. (2000). Selecting a Project Methodology. IEEE
Software, 7(4), 64–71.
Conrow, E. H. (2003). Effective Risk Management, (2 Ed). Reston,
VA: American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc.
Conway, M. E. (1968). How Do Committees Invent? Datamation,
14(5), 28–31. Retrieved from http:www.melconway.com/
research/committees.html (accessed October 24, 2014).
Cook, M. (2004). Understanding the Potential Opportunities
provided by Service‐Oriented Concepts to Improve Resource
Productivity. In T. Bhamra, & B. Hon (Eds.), Design and
Manufacture for Sustainable Development (pp. 123–34).
Suffolk, UK: Professional Engineering Publishing Limited.
Crosby, P. B. (1979). Quality Is Free. New York, NY: New
American Library.
Dahmann, J. (2014). System of Systems Pain Points. 24th
Annual INCOSE International Symposium. Las Vegas, NV:
International Council on Systems Engineering.
Daskin, M. S. (2010). Service Science. New York, NY: John
Wiley & Sons, Inc.
DAU. (1993). Committed Life Cycle Cost against Time. 3.1.
Fort Belvoir, VA: Defense Acquisition University.
DAU. (2010). Defense Acquisition Guidebook. Fort Belvoir,
VA: Defense Acquisition University. Retrieved from https://
acc.dau.mil/CommunityBrowser.aspx?id=22907&lan=en‐
US (accessed October 24, 2014).
Deming, W. E. (1986). Out of the Crisis. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Center for Advanced Engineering Study.
DeRosa, J. K. (2005). Enterprise Systems Engineering. Air
Force Association, Industry Day. Danvers, MA.
DeRosa, J. K. (2006). An Enterprise Systems Engineering
Model. 16th Annual INCOSE International Symposium.
Orlando, FL: International Council on Systems Engineering.

DoD. (1998). Integrated Product and Process Development
Handbook. August. Retrieved from http://www.acq.osd.
mil/se/docs/DoD‐IPPD‐Handbook‐Aug98.pdf (accessed
October 24, 2014).
DoD 5000.59. (2007). Directive:DoD Modeling and Simulation
(M&S) Management. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Defense.
DoD. (2010a). MIL‐STD‐464C. Electromagnetic Environmental
Effects, Requirements for Systems. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Defense.
DoD. (2010b). MIL‐STD‐882. System Safety Program Require­
ments. Washington, DC: US Department of Defense.
DoDAF. (2010). DoD Architecture Framework, Version 2.02.
Retrieved from http://dodcio.defense.gov/dodaf20.aspx
(accessed October 24, 2014).
DoD and US Army. (2003). PSM Guide V4.0c, Practical
Software and Systems Measurement: A Foundation for
Objective Project Management. Picatinny Arsenal, NJ.
Domingue, J., Fensel, D., Davies, J., Gonzalez‐Cabero, R., &
Pedrinaci, C. (2009). The Service Web: A Web of Billions
of Services. In G. Tselentis, J. Domingue, A. Galis, A.
Gavras, D. Hausheer, S. Krco, … T. Zeheriadis (Eds.),
Toward the Future Internet—A European Research Perspective.
Amsterdam, the Netherlands: IOS Press.
Dove, R. (2001). Response Ability: The Language, Structure,
and Culture of the Agile Enterprise. New York, NY: John
Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Dove, R. (2012). Agile Systems and Processes: Necessary and
Sufficient Fundamental Architecture (Agile 101). INCOSE
Webinar. Retrieved from http://www.parshift.com/s/Agile
Systems‐101.pdf (accessed September 19).
Dove, R., Popick, P., & Wilson, E. (2013). The Buck Stops
Here: Systems Engineering is Responsible for System
Security. Insight, 16(2), 6–10.
Draucker, L., Kaufman, S., Kuile, R. T., & Meinrenken, C.
(2011). Moving Forward on Product Carbon Footprint
Standards. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 15(2), 169–71.
DSMC. (1983). Systems Engineering Management Guide. Fort
Belvoir, VA: Defense Systems Management College.
Edwards, W., Miles Jr., R. F., & Von Winterfeldt, D. (2007).
Advances in Decision Analysis: From Foundations to
Applications. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Eisner, H. (2008). Essentials of Project and Systems Engineering
Management. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Elm, J., & Goldenson, D. (2012). The Business Case for
Systems Engineering Study: Results of the Systems
Engineering Effectiveness Study. Software Engineering
Institute, Carnegie Mellon University. Retrieved from http://
resources.sei.cmu.edu/library/asset-view.cfm?assetID=34061
(accessed January 26, 2015).

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Appendix a: References

Engel, A. (2010). Verification, Validation, and Testing of
Engineered Systems. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Retrieved from INCOSE Systems Engineering Center of
Excellence: http://www.incose.org/secoe/0105.htm (accessed
September 23).
Eppinger, S., & Browning, T. (2012). Design Structure
Matrix Methods and Applications. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Estefan, J. (2008). Survey of Model‐Based Systems Engineering
(MBSE) Methodologies, Rev. B, Section 3.2. NASA Jet
Propulsion Laboratory.
FAA. (2006). Systems Engineering Manual, Version 3.1.
Federal Aviation Administration.
Failliere, N. L. (2011). W32.Stuxnet Dossier Version 1.4.
Wired. Retrieved from http://www.wired.com/images_
blogs/threatlevel/2011/02/Symantec‐Stuxnet‐Update‐
Feb‐2011.pdf (accessed October 24, 2014).
Fairley, R. E. (2009). Managing and Leading Software Projects.
Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society; John Wiley &
Sons, Inc.
Fitts, P. M. (1954). The Information Capacity of the Human
Motor System in Controlling the Amplitude of Movement.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 47(6), 381–91.
Flood, R. L. (1999). Rethinking the Fifth Discipline: Learning
with the Unknowable. London, UK: Routledge.
Flood, R. L., & Carson, E. R. (1993). Dealing with Complexity:
An Introduction to the Theory and Application of Systems
Science (2 Ed). New York, NY: Plenum Press.
Forrester, J. W. (1961). Industrial Dynamics. Waltham, MA:
Pegasus Communications.
Forsberg, K. (1995). If I Could Do That, Then I Could …:
Systems Engineering in a Research and Development
Environment. Proceedings of the Fifth Annual INCOSE
Symposium. St. Louis, MO: International Council on
Systems Engineering.
Forsberg, K., & Mooz, H. (1991), The Relationship of System
Engineering to the Project Cycle. Proceedings of the
National Council for Systems Engineering (NCOSE)
Conference, Chattanooga, TN, pp. 57–65. October.
Forsberg, K., Mooz, H., & Cotterman, H. (2005). Visualizing
Project Management, (3 Ed). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley &
Sons, Inc.
Fossnes, T. (2005). Lessons from Mt. Everest Applicable to
Project Leadership. Proceedings of the Fifteenth Annual
INCOSE Symposium. Rochester, NY: International Council
on Systems Engineering.
Friedenthal, S. (1998). Object Oriented Systems Engineering.
Process Integration for 2000 and Beyond: Systems
Engineering and Software Symposium. New Orleans, LA:
Lockheed Martin Corporation.

249

Friedenthal, S., Moore, A., & Steiner, R. (2012). A
Practical Guide to SysML: The Systems Modeling
Language, (2 Ed). New York, NY: Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers, Inc.
Gallios, B., & Verma, D. (n.d.). System Design and Operational
Effectiveness (SDOE): Blending Systems and Supportability
Engineering Education. Partnership in RMS Standards,
5(1), 2.
GAO. (2008). Best Practices—Increased Focus on Require­
ments and Oversight Needed to Improve DOD’s Acquisition
Environment and Weapon System Quality. Washington,
DC: U.S. Government Accountability Office. Retrieved
from http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d08294.pdf (accessed
October 24, 2014).
Giachetti, R. E. (2010). Designing of Enterprise Systems:
Theory, Architecture, and Methods. Boca Raton, FL: CRC
Press.
Gilb, T. (2005). Competitive Engineering. Philadelphia, PA:
Elsevier.
Gilb, T., & Graham, D. (1993). Software Inspection. Reading,
MA: Addison‐Wesley‐Longman.
Grady, J. O. (1994). System Integration. Boca Raton, FL: CRC
Press.
Gupta, J., & Sharma, S. (2004). Creating Knowledge Based
Organizations. Boston, MA: Ida Group Publishing.
Haberfellner, R., & de Weck, O. (2005). Agile SYSTEMS
ENGINEERING versus AGILE SYSTEMS Engineering.
Proceedings of the 15th Annual INCOSE International
Symposium. Rochester, NY: International Council on
Systems Engineering.
Haimes, Y. (2012). Modelling Complex Systems of Systems
with Phantom System Models. Systems Engineering, 15(3),
333–46.
Hall, A. (1962). A Methodology for Systems Engineering.
Princeton, NJ: Van Nostrand.
Heijden, K., Bradfield, R., Burt, G., Cairns, G., & Wright, G.
(2002). The Sixth Sense: Accelerating Organizational
Learning with Scenarios. Chichester, UK: John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.
Herald, T., Verma, D., Lubert, C., & Cloutier, R. (2009). An
Obsolescence Management Framework for System
Baseline Evolution—Perspectives through the System Life
Cycle. Systems Engineering, 12, 1–20.
Hipel, K., Jamshidi, M., Tien, J., & White, C. (2007). The
Future of Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Application
Domains and Research Methods. IEEE Transactions on
Systems, Man and Cybernetics—Part C: Applications and
Reviews, 13(5), 726–43.
Hitchens, D. K. (2003). Advanced Systems Thinking, Engineer­
ing, and Management. Boston, MA: Artech House.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

250

Appendix a: References

Hollnagel, E., Woods, D. D., & Leveson, N. (Eds.). (2006).
Resilience Engineering: Concepts and Precepts. Aldershot,
UK: Ashgate Publishing Limited.
Honour, E. (2013). Systems Engineering Return on Investment.
Ph.D. Thesis, Defense and Systems Institute, University of
South Wales. Retrieved from http://www.hcode.com/seroi/
index.html (accessed January 26, 2015).
Hughes, T. (1998). In Rescuing Prometheus (pp. 141–95).
New York, NY: Pantheon Books.
Hybertson, D. (2009). Model‐Oriented Systems Engineering
Science: A Unifying Framework for Traditional and Complex
Systems. Boca Raton, FL: Auerback/CRC Press.
IEEE Std 828. (2012). IEEE Standard for Configuration
Management in Systems and Software Engineering.
New York, NY: Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers.
IEEE 1012. (2012). IEEE Standard for System and Software
Verification and Validation. New York, NY: Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
IIBA. (2009). A Guide to the Business Analysis Body of
Knowledge (BABOK Guide). Toronto, ON: International
Institute of Business Analysis.
INCOSE. (2004). What Is Systems Engineering? Retrieved
from http://www.incose.org/practice/whatissystemseng.aspx
(accessed June 14, 2004).
INCOSE. (2006). INCOSE Code of Ethics. International
Council on Systems Engineering. Retrieved from http://
www.incose.org/about/ethics.aspx (accessed February 15).
INCOSE. (2007). Systems Engineering Vision 2020.
International Council on Systems Engineering, Technical
Operations. Retrieved from http://www.incose.org/Products
Pubs/pdf/SEVision2020_20071003_v2_03.pdf (accessed
October 24, 2014).
INCOSE. (2010a). Model‐Based Systems Engineering
(MBSE) Wiki, hosted on OMG server. Retrieved from
http://www.omgwiki.org/MBSE/doku.php
(accessed
October 24, 2014).
INCOSE. (2010b). Systems Engineering Measurement Primer,
TP‐2010‐005, Version 2.0. Measurement Working Group, San
Diego, CA: International Council on Systems Engineering.
Retrieved from http://www.incose.org/ProductsPubs/pdf/
INCOSE_SysEngMeasurementPrimer_2010‐1205.pdf
(accessed October 24, 2014).
INCOSE. (2011). Lean Enablers for Systems Engineering.
Lean Systems Engineering Working Group. Retrieved from
INCOSE Connect https://connect.incowse.org/tb/leansw/
(accessed February 1).
INCOSE. (2012). Guide for the Application of Systems Engineer­
ing in Large Infrastructure Projects. TP‐2010‐007‐01. INCOSE
Infrastructure Working Group. San Diego, CA. June.

INCOSE RWG. (2012). Guide for Writing Requirements. San
Diego, CA: International Council on Systems Engineering,
Requirements Working Group.
INCOSE & PSM. (2005). Technical Measurement Guide,
Version 1.0, December 2005, http://www.incose.org and
http://www.psmsc.com (accessed October 24, 2014).
INCOSE UK. (2010). Systems Engineering Competencies
Framework. INCOSE United Kingdom, Ltd. Retrieved from
https://connect.incose.org/products/SAWG%20Shared%20
Documents/Other%20Technical%20Products/FRAMEWORK_
WEB_Jan2010_Issue3.pdf (accessed October 24, 2014).
ISM. (n.d.). Institute for Supply Management. Retrieved from
http://www.ism.ws/ (accessed October 24, 2014).
ISO 9001. (2008). Quality management systems—Requirements.
Geneva, Switzerland: International Organization for
Standardization.
ISO 10007. (2003). Quality Management Systems—Guidelines
for Configuration Management. Geneva, Switzerland:
International Organization for Standardization.
ISO 10303‐233. (2012). Industrial Automation Systems and
Integration—Product Data Representation and Exchange—
Part 233: Application Protocol: Systems Engineering. Geneva,
Switzerland: International Organization for Standardization.
ISO 13407. (1999). Human‐Centered Design Processes for
Interactive Systems. Geneva, Switzerland: International
Organization for Standardization.
ISO 14001. (2004). Environmental Management Systems—
Requirements with Guidance for Use. Geneva, Switzerland:
International Organization for Standardization. Retrieved
from http://14000store.com (accessed October 24, 2014).
ISO 14971. (2007) Medical Devices—Application of Risk
Management to Medical Devices. Geneva, Switzerland:
International Organization for Standardization.
ISO 17799. (2005) Information Technology—Security Techniques:
Code of Practice for Information Security Management.
Geneva, Switzerland: ISO/IEC.
ISO 26262. (2011). Road Vehicles—Functional Safety.
Geneva, Switzerland: International Organization for
Standardization.
ISO 31000. (2009). Risk Management—Principles and
Guidelines. Geneva, Switzerland: International Organization
for Standardization.
ISO 31010. (2009). Risk Management—Risk Assessment
Techniques. Geneva, Switzerland: International Organization
for Standardization.
IOS Guide 73. (2002). Risk Management—Vocabulary.
International Organization for Standardization.
ISO Guide 73. (2009). Risk Management—Vocabulary.
Geneva, Switzerland: International Organization for
Standardization.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Appendix a: References

ISO/IEC 16085. (2006). Systems and Software Engineering—
Life Cycle Processes: Risk Management. Geneva, Switzerland:
International Organization for Standardization.
ISO/IEC 27002. (2013). Information Technology—Security
Techniques: Code of Practice for Information Security
Controls. Geneva, Switzerland: International Organization
for Standardization.
ISO/IEC Guide 51. (1999). Safety Aspects—Guidelines for the
Inclusion in Standards. Geneva, Switzerland: International
Organization for Standardization.
ISO/IEC TR 19760. (2003) Systems Engineering—A Guide for
the Application of ISO/IEC 15288. Geneva, Switzerland:
International Organization for Standardization.
ISO/IEC TR 24748‐1. (2010). System and Software
Engineering—Life Cycle Management—Part 1: Guide for
Life Cycle Management. Geneva, Switzerland: International
Organization for Standardization. Retrieved from http://
standards.iso.org/ittf/PubliclyAvailableStandards/index.
html (accessed October 24, 2014).
ISO/IEC TR 24748‐2. (2010). Systems and Software
Engineering—Life Cycle Management—Part 2: Guide to
the Application of ISO/IEC 15288. Geneva, Switzerland:
International Organization for Standardization.
ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288. (2015). Systems and Software Engineering—
System Life Cycle Processes. Geneva, Switzerland: International
Organization for Standardization.
ISO/IEC/IEEE 15939, 2007. Systems and Software Engineering—
Measurement Process, ISO/IEC 2007. Geneva, Switzerland:
International Organization for Standardization.
ISO/IEC/IEEE 16326. (2009). Systems and Software Engineering—
Life Cycle Processes: Project Management. Geneva,
Switzerland: International Organization for Standardization.
ISO/IEC/IEEE 24748‐4. (2014). Systems and Software
Engineering—Life Cycle Management—Part 4: Systems
Engineering Planning. Geneva, Switzerland: International
Organization for Standardization.
ISO/IEC/IEEE 24765. (2010). Systems and Software Engineering—
Vocabulary. Geneva, Switzerland: International Organiza­
tion for Standardization. Retrieved from http://pascal.­
computer.org/sev_display/index.action (accessed October 24,
2014).
ISO/IEC/IEEE 29110 Series (2014) Systems and Software
Engineering—Lifecycle Profiles for Very Small Entities
(VSEs). International Organization for Standardization.
ISO/IEC/IEEE 29119. (2013). Software Testing Standard.
Geneva, Switzerland: International Organization for
Standardization.
ISO/IEC/IEEE 29148. (2011). Systems and Software Engineering—
Life Cycle Processes: Requirements Engineering. Geneva,
Switzerland: International Organization for Standardization.

251

ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010. (2011). Systems and Software
Engineering—Recommended Practice for Architectural
Descriptions of Software‐Intensive Systems. Geneva,
Switzerland: International Organization for Standardization.
Jackson, M. (1989). Which Systems Methodology When?
Initial Results from a Research Program. In R. Flood,
M. Jackson, & P. Keys (Eds.), Systems Prospects: The Next
Ten Years of Systems Research. New York, NY: Plenum Press.
Jackson, S., & Ferris, T. (2013). Resilience Principles for
Engineered Systems. Systems Engineering 19(2), 152–164.
Jacky, J. (1989). Programmed for Disaster. The Sciences, 29,
22–7.
Jensen, J. (2014). The Øresund Bridge—Linking Two Nations.
Retrieved from http://www.cowi.dk (accessed October 24,
2014).
JHUAPL. (2011). Tutorial Material—Model‐Based Systems
Engineering Using the Object‐Oriented Systems Engineer­
ing Method (OOSEM). The Johns Hopkins University
Applied Physics Laboratory. Retrieved from APL
Technology Transfer http://www.jhuapl.edu/ott/technologies/
copyright/sysml.asp (accessed October 24, 2014).
Johnson, S. (2010). Where Good Ideas Come From: The Natural
History of Innovation. New York, NY: Riverhead Books.
Juran, J. M. (Ed.). (1974). Quality Control Handbook, 3rd Ed.
New York, NY: McGraw‐Hill.
Kaposi, A., & Myers, M. (2001). Systems for All. London, UK:
Imperial College Press.
Katzan, H. (2008). Service Science. Bloomington, IN:
­iUniverse Books.
KBS. (2010). IDEF Family of Methods. Knowledge Based
Systems, Inc. Retrieved from IDEF: Integrated DEFinition
Methods http://www.idef.com/ (accessed October 24, 2014).
Keeney, R. L. (2002). Common Mistakes in Making Value
Trade‐Offs. Operations Research, 50(6), 935–45.
Keeney, R., & Gregory, R. (2005). Selecting Attributes to
Measure the Achievement of Objectives. Operations
Research, 15(1), 1–11.
Keoleian, G. A., & Menerey, D. (1993). Life Cycle Design
Guidance Manual: Environmental Requirements and
the Product System, EPA/600/R‐92/226. Environmental
Protection Agency, Risk Reduction Engineering Laboratory.
Retrieved from http://css.snre.umich.edu/css_doc/CSS93‐02.
pdf (accessed October 24, 2014).
Klir, G. (1991). Facets of Systems Science. New York, NY:
Plenum Press.
Kotter, J. P. (2001). What Leaders Really Do. Boston, MA:
Harvard Business Review: Best of HBR.
Kruchten, P. (1999). The Software Architect and the Software
Architecture Team. In P. Donohue (Ed.), Software

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

252

Appendix a: References

Architecture (pp. 565–583). Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
LAI MIT. (2013). Lean Enterprise Value Phase 1. Retrieved
from MIT Lean Advancement Initiative http://lean.mit.edu/
about/history/phase‐i?highlight=WyJwaGFzZSIsMV0=
(accessed October 24, 2014).
LAI, INCOSE, PSM, and SEARI. (2010). Systems Engineering
Leading Indicators Guide, Version 2.0, January 29.
Retrieved from http://www.incose.org and http://www.
psmsc.com (accessed October 24, 2014).
Langley, M., Robitaille, S., & Thomas, J. (2011). Toward a
New Mindset: Bridging the Gap Between Program
Management and Systems Engineering. PM Network,
25(9), 24–6. Retrieved from http://www.pmi.org (accessed
October 24, 2014).
Langner, R. (2012). Stuxnet Deep Dive. Miami Beach, FL:
SCADA Security Scientific Symposium (S4). Retrieved
from http://vimeopro.com/user10193115/s4‐2012#/video/
35806770 (accessed October 24, 2014).
Lano, R. (1977). The N2 Chart. Euclid, OH: TRW, Inc.
Larman, C., & Basili, V. (2003, June). Iterative and Incremental
Development: A Brief History. IEEE Software 36(6):
47–56.
Lawson, H. (2010). A Journey Through the Systems Landscape.
Kings College, UK: College Publications.
Lefever, B. (2005). ScSCE Methodology. Retrieved from
SeCSE Service Centric Systems Engineering: http://www.
secse-project.eu/ (accessed January 26, 2015).
Leveson, N., & Turner, C. S. (1993). An Investigation of the
Therac‐25 Accidents. IEEE Computer, 26(7), 18–41.
Lewin, K. (1958). Group Decision and Social Change. New
York, NY: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Lin, F., & Hsieh, P. (2011). A SAT View on New Service
Development. Service Science, 3(2), 141–57.
Lindvall, M., & Rus, I. (2000). Process Diversity in Software
Development. IEEE Software. 17(4), 14–8.
Little, W., Fowler, H. W., Coulson, J., & Onions, C. T. (1973).
The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary on Historical
Principles, 3rd Ed. Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press.
LMCO. (2008). Object‐Oriented Systems Engineering Method
(OOSEM) Tutorial, Version 3.11. Bethesda, MD: Lockheed
Martin Corporation and San Diego, CA: INCOSE OOSEM
Working Group.
Lombardo, M. M., & Eichinger, R. W. (1996). The Career
Architect Development Planner, 1st Ed. Minneapolis, MN:
Lominger.
Lonergan, B. (1992). Insight: A Study of Human Understanding.
In F. E. Crowe, & R. M. Doran (Eds.), Collected Works of

Bernard Lonergan (5 Ed, Vol. 3). Toronto, ON: University
of Toronto Press.
Long, D. (2013). The Holistic Perspective—Systems
Engineering as Leaders. INCOSE Great Lakes Regional
Conference Key Note Address. West Lafayette, IN.
Luzeaux, D., & Ruault, J. R. (Eds.). (2010). Systems of Systems.
New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Lykins, H., Friedenthal, S., & Meilich, A. (2000). Adapting
UML for an Object‐Oriented Systems Engineering Method
(OOSEM). Proceedings of the 20th Annual INCOSE
International Symposium. Chicago, IL: INCOSE.
M&SCO. (2013). Verification, Validation, & Accreditation
(VV&A) Recommended Practices Guide (RPG). Retrieved
from U.S. DoD Modeling & Simulation Coordination
Office: http://www.msco.mil/VVA_RPG.html (accessed
October 24, 2014).
Magerholm, F. A., Shau, E. M., & Haskins, C. (2010). A
Framework for Environmental Analyses of Fish Food
Production Systems Based on Systems Engineering
Principles. Systems Engineering, 13, 109–18.
Maglio, P., & Spohrer, J. (2008). Fundamentals of Service
Science. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science,
36(1), 18–20.
Maier, M. W. (1998). Architecting Principles for Systems of
Systems. Systems Engineering, 1(4), 267–84.
Maier, M. W., & Rechtin, E. (2009). The Art of Systems
Architecting, 3rd Ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Martin, B. (2010). New Initiatives in the Army Green Procure­
ment Program. Presentation, U.S. Army Public Health
Command. Retrieved from http://www.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/­
fulltext/u2/a566679.pdf (accessed October 24, 2014).
Martin, J. N. (1996). Systems Engineering Guidebook: A
Process for Developing Systems and Products. Boca Raton,
FL: CRC Press.
Martin, J. N. (2011). Transforming the Enterprise Using a
Systems Approach. Proceedings of the 21st Annual INCOSE
International Symposium. Denver, CO: International
Council on Systems Engineering.
McAfee, A. (2009). Enterprise 2.0: New Collaborative Tools
for Your Organizations Toughest Challenges. Boston, MA:
Harvard Business School Press.
McConnel, S. (1998, May). The power of process. IEEE
Computer 31(5), 100–102.
McDonough, W. (2013). McDonough Innovations: Design for
the Ecological Century. Retrieved from http://www.
mcdonough.com/ (accessed October 24, 2014).
McGarry, J., Card, D., Jones, C., Layman, B., Clark, E., Dean, J.,
& Hall, F. (2001). Practical Software Measurement:
Objective Information for Decision Makers, Boston, MA:
Addison‐Wesley.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Appendix a: References

McGrath, D. (2003). China Awaits High Speed Maglev.
Wired News. Retrieved from http://archive.wired.com/
science/discoveries/news/2003/01/57163 (accessed January
26, 2015).
McManus, H. L. (2004). Product Development Value Stream
Mapping Manual, LAI Release Beta. Boston, MA: MIT
Lean Advancement Initiative.
McManus, H. L. (2005). Product Development Transition to
Lean (PDTTL) Roadmap, LAI Release Beta. Boston, MA:
MIT Lean Advancement Initiative.
Michel, R. M., & Galai, D. (2001). Risk Management.
New York, NY: McGraw‐Hill.
Miller, G. A. (1956). The Magical Number Seven, Plus or
Minus Two: Some Limits on our Capacity for Processing
Information. Psychological Review, 63(2), 81.
MoDAF. (n.d.). The Website for MODAF Users and
Implementers. UK Secretary of State for Defence (run by
Model Futures, Ltd.). Retrieved from http://www.modaf.
org.uk/ (accessed October 24, 2014).
Murman, E. M. (2002). Lean Enterprise Value. New York, NY:
Palgrave.
Nagel, R. N. (1992). 21st Century Manufacturing Enterprise
Strategy Report. Prepared for the Office of Naval Research.
Retrieved from http://www.dtic.mil/cgi‐bin/GetTRDoc?
AD=ADA257032 (accessed October 24, 2014).
NASA. (2007a). NASA Pilot Benchmarking Initiative:
Exploring Design Excellence Leading to Improved Safety
and Reliability. Final Report. National Aeronautic and
Space Administration.
NASA. (2007b). NASA Systems Engineering Handbook.
National Aeronautic and Space Administration. Retrieved
from http://www.es.ele.tue.nl/education/7nab0/2013/doc/
NASA‐SP‐2007‐6105‐Rev‐1‐Final‐31Dec2007.pdf
(accessed October 24, 2014).
NDIA. (2008). Engineering for Systems Assurance, Version
1.0. National Defense Industrial Association, Systems
Assurance Committee. Retrieved from http://www.acq.
osd.mil/se/docs/SA‐Guidebook‐v1‐Oct2008.pdf (accessed
October 24, 2014).
NDIA. (2011). System Development Performance Measure­
ment Report. Arlington, VA: National Defense Industrial
Association, December.
Nissen, J. (2006). The Øresund Link. The Arup Journal, 31(2),
37–41.
NIST. (2012). National Vulnerability Database, Version 2.2.
National Institute of Standards and Technology, Computer
Science Division. Retrieved from http://nvd.nist.gov/
(accessed December 19)
Norman, D. (1990). The Design of Everyday Things. New
York, NY: Doubleday.

253

NRC (Nuclear Regulatory Commission). (2005). Fact Sheets,
Three Mile Island Accident. U.S. Nuclear Regulatory
Commission. Report NUREG/BR‐0292. Retrieved from
http://pbadupws.nrc.gov/docs/ML0825/ML082560250.pdf
(accessed October 24, 2014).
NRC (National Research Council). (2008). Pre‐Milestone A
and Early‐Phase Systems Engineering. National Research
Council of the National Academies. Washington, DC: The
National Academies Press. Retrieved from http://www.nap.
edu/ (accessed October 24, 2014).
NRC (National Resilience Coalition). (2012). Definition of
Resilience. National Resilience Coalition. Washington, DC:
The Infrastructure Security Partnership.
O’Connor, P. D., & Kleyner, A. (2012). Practical Reliability
Engineering, 5th Ed. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Oehmen, J. (Ed.). (2012). The Guide to Lean Enablers for
Managing Engineering Programs, Version 1.0. Cambridge,
MA: Joint MIT‐PMI‐INCOSE Community of Practice on
Lean in Program Management. Retrieved from http://hdl.
handle.net/1721.1/70495/ (accessed October 24, 2014).
Office of Government Commerce. (2009). ITIL Lifecycle
Publication Suite Books. London, UK: The Stationery Office.
OMG. (2013a). Documents Associated with Unified Profile for
DoDAF and MODAF (UPDM), Version 2.1. Object
Management Group, Inc. Retrieved from http://www.omg.
org/spec/UPDM/Current (accessed October 24, 2014).
OMG. (2013b). OMG Systems Modeling Language (SysML).
Object Management Group, Inc. Retrieved from http://
www.omgsysml.org (accessed October 24, 2014).
Oppenheim, B. W. (2004). Lean Product Development Flow.
Systems Engineering, 7(4), 352–76.
Oppenheim, B. W. (2011). Lean for Systems Engineering with
Lean Enablers for Systems Engineering. Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Parnell, G. S., Bresnick, T., Tani, S., & Johnson, E. (2013).
Handbook of Decision Analysis. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley
& Sons, Inc.
Patanakul, P., & Shenhar, A. (2010). Exploring the Concept of
Value Creation in Program Planning and Systems
Engineering Processes. Systems Engineering, 13, 340–52.
Pineda, R. (2010). Understanding Complex Systems of
Systems Engineering. Fourth General Assembly Cartagena
Network of Engineering, Metz, France.
Pineda, Martin, & Spoherer, (2014), in SEBoK, Part 3, Value of
Service Systems Engineering.
PLCS. (2013). Product Life Cycle Support (PLCS). Retrieved
from http://www.plcs‐resources.org/ (accessed October 24,
2014)..
PMI. (2000). A Guide to the PMBOK. Newton Square, PA:
Project Management Institute.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

254

Appendix a: References

PMI. (2009). Practice Standard for Project Risk Management.
Newton Square, PA: Project Management Institute.
PMI. (2013). The Standards for Program Management, 3rd Ed.
Newton Square, PA: Project Management Institute.
Porrello, A. M. (n.d.). Death and Denial: The Failure of the
THERAC‐25, A Medical Linear Accelerator. California
Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo, CA.
Retrieved from http://users.csc.calpoly.edu/~jdalbey/SWE/
Papers/THERAC25.html (accessed October 24, 2014).
Qiu, R. (2009). Computational Thinking of Service Systems:
Dynamics and Adaptiveness Modeling. Service Science,
1(1), 42–55.
Rebovich, G. (2006). Systems thinking for the enterprise: new
and emerging perspectives. Proceedings 2006 IEEE /SMC
International Conference on System of Systems Engineering.
Los Angeles, CA: Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers.
Rebovich, G., & White, B. E. (Eds.). (2011). Enterprise
Systems Engineering: Advances in the Theory and Practice.
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Richards, M. G. (2009). Multi‐Attribute Tradespace
Exploration for Survivability. Boston: Massachusetts
Institute of Technology.
Roedler, G. (2010). Knowledge Management Position.
Proceedings of the 20th Annual INCOSE International
Symposium. Chicago, IL: International Council on Systems
Engineering.
Roedler, G. J., & Jones, C. (2006). Technical Measurement:
A Collaborative Project of PSM, INCOSE, and Industry.
INCOSE Measurement Working Group. INCOSE
TP‐2003‐020‐01.
Roedler, G., Rhodes, D. H., Schimmoler, H., & Jones, C. (Eds.).
(2010). Systems Engineering Leading Indicators Guide, v2.0.
Boston: MIT; INCOSE; PSM.
Ross, A. M., Rhodes, D. H., & Hastings, D. E. (2008). Defining
Changeability: Reconciling Flexibility, Adaptability,
Scalability, Modifiability, and Robustness for Maintaining
System Lifecycle Value. Systems Engineering, 11, 246–62.
Rouse, W. B. (1991). Design for Success: A Human‐Centered
Approach to Designing Successful Products and Systems.
New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Rouse, W. B. (2005). Enterprise as Systems: Essential
Challenges and Enterprise Transformation. Systems
Engineering, 8(2), 138–50.
Rouse, W. B. (2009). Engineering the Enterprise as a System.
In A. P. Sage, & W. B. Rouse (Eds.), Handbook of Systems
Engineering and Management, 2nd Ed. New York, NY:
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Royce, W. W. (1970). Managing the Development of Large Software
Systems, Proceedings, IEEE WESCON, pp. 1–9. August.

Ryan, A. (2008). What Is a Systems Approach? Journal of
Non‐Linear Science, arXiv, 0809.1698.
Ryan, M. (2013). An Improved Taxonomy for Major Needs
and Requirements Artifacts. Proceedings of the 23rd Annual
INCOSE International Symposium. Philadelphia, PA:
International Council on Systems Engineering.
SAE Aerospace Quality Standard AS9100:C. (2009). Quality
Management Systems—Requirements for Aviation, Space,
and Defense Organizations. Warrendale, PA: Society of
Automotive Engineers.
SAE ARP 4754. (2010). Guidelines for Development of Civil
Aircraft and Systems. Warrendale, PA: Society of
Automotive Engineers.
SAE JA 1011 (2009). Evaluation criteria for Reliability‐
Centered Maintenance (RCM) processes. Warrendale, PA:
Society of Automotive Engineers.
Salter, K. (2003). Presentation Given at the Jet Propulsion
Laboratory. Pasadena, CA.
Salvendy, G. (Ed.). (1982). Handbook of Industrial Engineer­
ing. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Salzman, J. (1997). Informing the Green Consumer: The
Debate Over the Use and Abuse of Environmental Labels.
Journal of Industrial Ecology, 1(2), 11–21.
SAVE. (2009). Welcome to SAVE International. SAVE
International. Retrieved from http://www.value‐eng.org/
(accessed October 24, 2014).
SAWE. (n.d.). Standards and Practices. Retrieved from Society
of Allied Weight Engineers, Inc.: http://www.sawe.org/rp
(accessed October 24, 2014).
Scholtes, P. R. (1988). The Team Handbook: How the Use Teams
to Improve Quality. Madison, WI: Joiner Associates, Inc.
SE VOCAB. (2013). Software and Systems Engineering
Vocabulary. Retrieved from http://pascal.computer.org/sev_
display/index.action (accessed October 24, 2014).
SEBoK. (2014). BKCASE Editorial Board. The Guide to the
Systems Engineering Body of Knowledge (SEBoK), version 1.3. R.D. Adcock (EIC). Hoboken, NJ: The Trustees of
the Stevens Institute of Technology. www.sebokwiki.org.
BKCASE is managed and maintained by the Stevens
Institute of Technology Systems Engineering Research
Center, the International Council on Systems Engineering,
and the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
Computer Society.
Software Engineering Institute. (2010). CMMI® (Measurement
and Quantitative Management Process Areas), Version 1.3,
November. Retrieved from http://www.sei.cmu.edu
(accessed October 24, 2014).
Senge, P. (1990). The Fifth Discipline: The Art & Practice
of the Learning Organization. New York, NY: Crown
Business.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Appendix a: References

Shaw, T. E., & Lake, J. G. (1993). Systems Engineering:
The Critical Product Development Enabler. 36th APICS
International Conference Proceedings. American Produc­
tion and Inventory Control Society.
Sheard, S. (1996). Twelve Systems Engineering Roles.
Proceedings of the 6th Annual INCOSE International
Symposium. Boston, MA: International Council on Systems
Engineering.
Shewhart, W. A. (1939). Statistical Method from the Viewpoint
of Quality Control. New York, NY: Dover.
Sillitto, H. G. (2012). Integrating Systems Science, Systems
Thinking, and Systems Engineering: Understanding the
Differences and Exploiting the Synergies. Proceedings of
the 22nd Annual INCOSE International Symposium. Rome,
Italy: International Council on Systems Engineering.
Sillitto, H. G. (2013). Composable Capability—Principles,
Strategies, and Methods for Capability Systems
Engineering. Proceedings of the 23rd Annual INCOSE
International Symposium. Philadelphia, PA: International
Council on Systems Engineering.
Skanska. (2013). Øresund Bridge: Improving Daily Life for
Commuters, Travelers, and Frogs. Retrieved from Skanska:
Øresund Consortium: http://www.group.skanska.com/
Campaigns/125/Oresund‐Bridge/ (accessed October 24,
2014).
Skyttner, L. (2006). General Systems Theory: Perspectives,
Problems, Practice, 2nd Ed. Singapore: World Scientific
Publishing Company.
Slack, R. A. (1998). Application of Lean Principles to the
Military Aerospace Product Development Process. Master
of Science—Engineering and Management Thesis,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
SMTDC. (2005). Shanghai Maglev Project Background.
Retrieved from Shanghai Maglev Train: http://www.smtdc.
com/en/ (accessed January 26, 2015).
Sols, A., Romero, J., & Cloutier, R. (2012). Performance‐based
Logistics and Technology Refreshment Programs: Bridging
the Operational‐Life Performance Capability Gap in the
Spanish F‐100 Frigates. System Engineering, 15, 422–32.
Spath, D., & Fahnrich, K. P. (Eds.). (2007). Advances in Services
Innovations. Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany: Springer‐Verlag.
Spohrer, J. C. (2011). Service Science: Progress & Direction.
International Joint Conference on Service Science. Taipei,
Taiwan.
Spohrer, J. C., & Maglio, P. P. (2010). Services Science:
Toward a Smarter Planet. In G. Slavendy, & W. Karwowski
(Eds.), Introduction to Service Engineering. Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Srinivansan, J. (2010). Towards a Theory Sensitive Approach
to Planning Enterprise Transformation. 5th EIASM

255

Workshop on Organizational Change and Development.
Vienna, Austria: European Institute for Advanced Studies in
Management.
Stoewer, H. (2005). Modern Systems Engineering: A Driving
Force for Industrial Competitiveness. Presentation to
Members of the Japan INCOSE Chapter. Tokyo, Japan.
The White House. (2010). National Security Strategy.
Washington, DC: The White House.
Theilmann, W., & Baresi, L. (2009). Multi‐level SLAs for
Harmonized Management in the Future Internet. In
G. Tselentix, J. Dominque, A. Galis, A. Gavras, D.
Hausheer, S. Krco, . . . T. Zehariadis (Eds.), Towards the
Future Internet—A European Research Perspective.
Amsterdam, the Netherlands: IOS Press.
Tien, J., & Berg, D. (2003). A Case for Service Systems
Engineering. Journal Systems Science and Systems
Engineering, 12(1), 13–38.
Toyota. (2009). Toyota Production System: Just‐in‐Time—
Productivity Improvement. Retrieved from http://www.­
toyota‐global.com/company/vision_philosophy/toyota_
production_system/ (accessed October 24, 2014).
Transrapid. (2003, May 23). Transrapid International. Retrieved
from http://www.transrapid.de/cgi/en/basics.prg?session=
86140b5952535725_590396 (accessed October 24, 2014).
Tuttle, P., & Bobinis, J. (2013). Specifying Affordability.
Proceedings of the 23rd Annual INCOSE International
Symposium. Philadelphia, PA: International Council on
Systems Engineering.
UNEP. (2012). GEO‐5: Global Environmental Outlook.
Retrieved from United National Environment Programme:
http://www.unep.org/geo (accessed October 24, 2014).
Urwick, L. E. (1956). The Manager’s Span of Control. Harvard
Business Review. May/June.
Vargo, S. L., & Akaka, M. A. (2009). Service‐Dominant Logic
as a Foundation for Service Science: Clarifications. Service
Science, 1(1), 32–41.
Walden, D. (2007). YADSES: Yet Another Darn Systems
Engineering Standard. Proceedings of the 17th Annual
INCOSE International Symposium. San Diego, CA:
International Council on Systems Engineering.
Warfield, J. (2006). An Introduction to Systems Science.
Hackensack, NJ: World Scientific Publishing Company.
Waters Foundation. (2013). Systems Thinking. Retrieved from
Systems Thinking in Schools: http://watersfoundation.org/
systems‐thinking/overview/ (accessed October 24, 2014).
Wideman, R. M. (2002). Comparative Glossary of Project
Management Terms, Version 3.1. Retrieved from http://­
maxwideman.com/pmglossary/ (accessed October 24, 2014).
Wideman, R. M. (Ed.). (2004). Project and Program Risk
Management: A Guide to Managing Project Risks and

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

256

Appendix a: References

Opportunities. Newtown Square, PA: Project Management
Institute.
Wiener, N. (1948). Cybernetics or Control and Communication
in the Animal and the Machine. (Hermann, & Cie, Eds.)
New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Wild, J. P., Jupp, J., Kerley, W., Eckert, W., & Clarkson, P. J.
(2007). Towards a Framework for Profiling of Products and
Services. 5th International Conference on Manufacturing
Research (ICMR). Leicester, UK.
Womack, J. P., & Jones, D. T. (1996). Lean Thinking. New
York, NY: Simon & Schuster.

Wymore, A.W. (1967). A Mathematical Theory of Systems
Engineering: The Elements. Malabar, FL: Krieger
Publication Co.
Wymore, A. W. (1993). Model‐Based Systems Engineering.
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Yourdon, E. (1989). Modern Structured Analysis. Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Yourdon Press.
Zachman, J. A. (1987). A Framework for Information Systems
Architecture. IBM Systems Journal, 26(3), 276–92.
Retrieved from http://www.zifa.com (accessed October 24,
2014).

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Appendix B: Acronyms

Aa
Ai
Ao
act
AECL
AIAA
ANSI
API
ARP
AS
ASQ
ASAM
ASEP
AUTOSAR
AVS
bdd
BRS
CAIV
CBA

Achieved availability
Inherent availability
Operational availability
Activity diagrams [SysML™]
Atomic Energy Commission Limited
[Canada]
American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics [United States]
American National Standards Institute
[United States]
Application programming interface
Aerospace Recommended Practice
Aerospace Standard
American Society for Quality
Association for Standardization of
Automation and Measuring Systems
Associate Systems Engineering
Professional [INCOSE]
AUTomotive Open System ARchitecture
Associate Value Specialist [SAVE]
Block definition diagram [SysML™]
Business Requirements Specification
Cost as an Independent Variable
Cost–benefit analysis

CBM
CCB
CE
CEA
CFR
CI
CMMI®
CMP
ConOps
COTS
CSEP
CVS
DAU
DFD
DMS
DoD
DoDAF
DSM
DTC
ECP
ECR

Condition‐based maintenance
Configuration Control Board
Conformité Européenne [EU]
Cost‐effectiveness analysis
Code of Federal Regulations [United States]
Configuration item
Capability Maturity Model® Integration
[CMMI Institute]
Configuration management plan
Concept of operations
Commercial off‐the‐shelf
Certified Systems Engineering Professional
[INCOSE]
Certified Value Specialist [SAVE]
Defense Acquisition University [United States]
Data flow diagrams
Diminishing material shortages
Department of Defense [United States]
Department of Defense Architecture
Framework [United States]
Design Structure Matrix
Design to cost
Engineering Change Proposal
Engineering change request

INCOSE Systems Engineering Handbook: A Guide for System Life Cycle Processes and Activities, Fourth Edition.
Edited by David D. Walden, Garry J. Roedler, Kevin J. Forsberg, R. Douglas Hamelin and Thomas M. Shortell.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

257

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

258

Appendix B: Acronyms

EIA
EM
EMC
EMI
EN
ER
ESEP
ETA
FAST
FBSE
FEA
FEP
FFBD
FHA
FMEA
FMECA
FMVSS
FoS
FTA
G&A
GAO
GEIA
GENIVI
GNP
GPP
HALT
HFE
HHA
HSI
HTS
ibd
IBM
ICD
ICS
ICSM
ICWG
IDEF
IEC
IEEE
IFWG
IID
ILS

Electronic Industries Alliance
Electromagnetic
Electromagnetic compatibility
Electromagnetic interference
Engineering notice
Entity relationship diagram
Expert Systems Engineering Professional
[INCOSE]
Event tree analysis
Function Analysis System Technique
Functions‐based systems engineering
Front‐end analyses
Fuel enrichment plant
Functional flow block diagram
Functional hazard analysis
Failure Mode and Effects Analysis
Failure modes, effects, and criticality
analysis
Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards
[United States]
Family of systems
Fault tree analysis
General and administrative
Government Accountability Office
[United States]
Government Electronic Industries Alliance
Geneva In‐Vehicle Infotainment Alliance
Gross national product
Green Public Procurement
Highly accelerated life testing
Human factors engineering
Health hazard analysis
Human systems integration
Hazard tracking system
Internal block diagram [SysML™]
International Business Machines
Interface control document
Industrial control system
Incremental Commitment Spiral Model
Interface Control Working Group
Integrated definition for functional
modeling
International Electrotechnical Commission
Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers
Interface Working Group
Incremental and iterative development
Integrated logistics support

INCOSE
IPAL
IPD
IPDT
IPO
IPPD
IPT
ISO
IT
IV&V
JSAE
JPL
KDR
KM
KPP
KSA
LAI
LCA
LCC
LCM
LEfMEP
LEfSE
LINAC
LOR
LORA
MBSE
MIT
MoC
MODA
MoDAF
MOE
MOP
MORS
MOS
MPE
MTA
MTBF
MTBR
MTTR
N2
NASA

International Council on Systems
Engineering
INCOSE Product Asset Library [INCOSE]
Integrated Product Development
Integrated Product Development Team
Input–process–output
Integrated Product and Process
Development
Integrated Product Team
International Organization for
Standardization
Information technology
Integration, verification, and validation
Japan Society of Automotive Engineers
[Japan]
Jet Propulsion Laboratory [United States]
Key driving requirement
Knowledge management
Key Performance Parameter
Knowledge, skills, and abilities
Lean Advancement Initiative
Life cycle assessment
Life cycle cost
Life cycle management
Lean Enablers for Managing Engineering
Programs
Lean Enablers for Systems Engineering
Linear accelerator
Level of rigor
Level of Repair Analysis
Model‐based systems engineering
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Models of computation
Multiple objective decision analysis
Ministry of Defense Architecture
Framework [United Kingdom]
Measure of effectiveness
Measure of performance
Military Operations Research Society
Measure of suitability
Mass Properties Engineering
Maintenance Task Analysis
Mean time between failure
Mean time between repair
Mean time to repair
N‐squared diagram
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration [United States]

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Appendix B: Acronyms

NEC
NCOSE
NCS
NDI
NDIA
O&SHA
OAM&P
OEM
OMG
OOSEM
OpEMCSS
OPM
OpsCon
OSI
par
PBL
PBS
PDT
PERT
PHA
PHS&T
PIT
pkg
PLC
PLCS
PLM
PMI
PRA
PSM
QA
QM
R&D
RAM
RBD
RCM
REACH
req
RFC
RFP

National Electrical Code [United States]
National Council on Systems
Engineering (pre‐1995)
Network‐Centric Systems
Nondevelopmental item
National Defense Industrial Association
[United States]
Operations and support hazard analysis
Operations, administration, maintenance,
and provisioning
Original Equipment Manufacturer
Object Management Group
Object‐Oriented Systems Engineering
Method
Operational Evaluation Modeling for
Context‐Sensitive Systems
Object‐Process Methodology
Operational concept
Open System Interconnect
Parametric diagram [SysML™]
Performance‐based logistics
Product breakdown structure
Product Development Team
Program Evaluation Review Technique
Preliminary hazard analysis
Packaging, handling, storage, and
transportation
Product Integration Team
Package diagram [SysML™]
Programmable logic controller
Product Life Cycle Support
Product line management
Project Management Institute
Probabilistic risk assessment
Practical Software and Systems
Measurement
Quality assurance
Quality management
Research and development
Reliability, availability, and
maintainability
Reliability block diagram
Reliability‐centered maintenance
Registration, Evaluation, Authorization,
and Restriction of Chemical Substances
Requirement diagram [SysML™]
Request for change
Request for proposal

259

Request for quote
Request for variance
Risk management plan
Return on investment
Rational Unified Process [IBM]
Rational Unified Process for Systems
Engineering [IBM]
RVTM
Requirements Verification and Traceability
Matrix
SA
State Analysis [JPL]
SAE
SAE International [formerly the Society
of Automotive Engineers]
SAR
Safety Assessment Report
SAVE
Society of American Value Engineers
SCM
Supply chain management
SCN
Specification change notice
sd
Sequence diagram [SysML™]
SE
Systems engineering
SEARI
Systems Engineering Advancement
Research Institute
SEBoK
Guide to the Systems Engineering Body
of Knowledge
SEH
Systems Engineering Handbook [INCOSE]
SEHA
System element hazard analysis
SEIT
Systems Engineering and Integration Team
SEMP
Systems engineering management plan
SEMS
Systems Engineering Master Schedule
SEP
Systems engineering plan
SHA
System hazard analysis
SLA
Service‐level agreement
SOI
System of interest
SoS
System of systems
SOW
Statement of work
SROI
Social return on investment
SRR
System Requirements Review
SSDP
Service system design process
STEP
Standard for the Exchange of Product
Model Data
stm
State machine diagram [SysML™]
StRS
Stakeholder Requirements Specification
SWOT
Strength–weakness–opportunity–threat
SysML™ Systems Modeling Language [OMG]
SyRS
System Requirements Specification
SYSPG Systems Engineering Process Group
TADSS
Training Aids, Devices, Simulators, and
Simulations
TCO
Total cost of ownership
TOC
Total ownership cost
RFQ
RFV
RMP
ROI
RUP
RUP‐SE

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

260

Appendix B: Acronyms

TOGAF
TPM
TRL
TRP
TQM
TR
uc
UIC
UK
UL
UML™
US

The Open Group Architecture Framework
Technical performance measure
Technology readiness level
Technology refreshment program
Total quality management
Technical report
Use case diagram [SysML™]
International Union of Railways
United Kingdom
Underwriters Laboratory [United States and
Canada]
Unified Modeling Language™ [OMG]
United States

USB
USD
V&V
VA
VE
VM
VMP
VSE
VSME
VV&A
WBS
WG

Universal Serial Bus
US dollars [United States]
Verification and validation
Value analysis
Value engineering
Value management
Value Methodology Practitioner [SAVE]
Very small entities
Very small and micro enterprises
Verification, validation, and
accreditation
Work breakdown structure
Working group

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Appendix C: Terms and Definitions

Words not included in this glossary carry meanings consistent with general dictionary definitions. Other related terms
can be found in SE VOCAB (2013).
Acquirer

“‐ilities”

Acquisition
logistics

Activity

The stakeholder that acquires or
procures a product or service from a
supplier
The
developmental,
operational,
and support requirements a program
must address (named because they
typically end in “ility”—availability,
maintainability,
vulnerability,
reliability, supportability, etc.)
Technical and management activities
conducted to ensure supportability
implications are considered early and
throughout the acquisition process to
minimize support costs and to provide
the user with the resources to sustain
the system in the field
A set of cohesive tasks of a process

Agile

Agreement

Architecture

Project execution methods can be
described on a continuum from “adaptive”
to “predictive.” Agile methods exist on
the “adaptive” side of this continuum,
which is not the same as saying that
agile methods are “unplanned” or
“undisciplined”
The mutual acknowledgment of terms
and conditions under which a working
relationship is conducted
(System) fundamental concepts or
properties of a system in its environment
embodied in its elements, relationships,
and in the principles of its design and
evolution (see ISO 42010)

INCOSE Systems Engineering Handbook: A Guide for System Life Cycle Processes and Activities, Fourth Edition.
Edited by David D. Walden, Garry J. Roedler, Kevin J. Forsberg, R. Douglas Hamelin and Thomas M. Shortell.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

261

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

262

Appendix C: Terms and Definitions

Baseline

Black box/
white box

Capability

Commercial
off‐the‐shelf
(COTS)

Commonality

Configuration

Configuration
item (CI)

Decision gate

The gate‐controlled step‐by‐step
elabora­
tion of business, budget,
functional, performance, and physical
characteristics, mutually agreed to
by buyer and seller, and under formal
change control. Baselines can be
modified between formal decision
gates by mutual consent through the
change control process.
An agreed‐to description of the
attributes of a product at a point in time,
which serves as a basis for defining
change (ANSI/EIA‐649‐1998)
Black box represents an external view
of the system (attributes). White box
represents an internal view of the system
(attributes and structure of the elements)
An expression of a system, product,
function, or process ability to achieve a
specific objective under stated conditions
Commercial items that require no
unique acquirer modifications or
maintenance over the life cycle of
the product to meet the needs of the
procuring agency
(Of a product line) refers to functional
and nonfunctional characteristics
that can be shared with all member
products within a product line (ISO
26550 2nd CD)
A characteristic of a system element,
or project artifact, describing their
maturity or performance
A hardware, software, or composite
item at any level in the system
hierarchy designated for configuration
management. (The system and each of
its elements are individual CIs.) CIs
have four common characteristics:
1. Defined functionality
2. Replaceable as an entity
3. Unique specification
4. Formal control of form, fit, and function
A decision gate is an approval event
(often associated with a review meeting).
Entry and exit criteria are established for
each decision gate; continuation beyond
the decision gate is contingent on the
agreement of decision makers

Derived
requirements

Design
constraints

Domain asset

Detailed characteristics of the system of
interest (SOI) that typically are identi­
fied during elicitation of stakeholder
requirements, requirements analysis,
trade studies, or validation
The boundary conditions, externally or
internally imposed, for the SOI within
which the organization must remain
when executing the processes during
the concept and development stages
Is the output of a subprocess of domain
engineering that is reused for producing
two or more products in a product line.
A domain asset may be a variability
model, an architectural design, a
software component, a domain model,
a requirements statement or specifica­
tion, a plan, a test case, a process
description, or any other element useful
for producing products and services.
Syn: domain artifact (ISO 26550 2nd CD)
Note: In systems engineering, domain
assets may be subsystems or components
to be reused in further system designs.
Domain assets are considered through
their original requirements and technical
characteristics. Domain assets include,
but are not limited to, use cases, logical
principles, environmental behavioral
data, and risks or opportunities learned
from the previous projects
Domain assets are not physical
products available off‐the‐shelf and
ready for commissioning. Physical
products (e.g., mechanical parts,
electronic components, harnesses,
optic lenses) are stored and managed
according to the best practices of their
respective disciplines
Note: In software engineering, domain
assets can include source or object code
to be reused during the implementation
Note: Domain assets have their own
life cycles. ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288 may
be used to manage a life cycle

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Appendix C: Terms and Definitions

Identifies and bounds the functional
domains that are important to an
envisioned product line and provide
sufficient reuse potential to justify the
product line creation. Domain scoping
builds on the definitions of the product
scoping (ISO 26550 2nd CD)
Element
See system element
Enabling
A system that supports a SOI during
system
its life cycle stages but does not
necessarily contribute directly to its
function during operation
Enterprise
A purposeful combination of interde­
pendent resources that interact with each
other to achieve buisness and operational
goals (Rebovich and White, 2011)
Environment
The surroundings (natural or man‐
made) in which the SOI is utilized and
supported or in which the system is
being developed, produced, and retired
Facility
The physical means or equipment
for facilitating the performance of
an action, for example, buildings,
instruments, and tools
Failure
The event in which any part of an item
does not perform as required by its
specification. The failure may occur at a
value in excess of the minimum required
in the specification, that is, past design
limits or beyond the margin of safety
Functional
An evaluation to ensure that the prod­
configuration
uct meets baseline functional and
audit
performance capabilities (adapted from
ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288)
Human factors The systematic application of relevant
information about human abilities,
characteristics, behavior, motivation,
and performance. It includes principles
and applications in the areas of human‐
related engineering, anthropometrics,
ergonomics, job performance skills and
aids, and human performance evaluation
Human systems The interdisciplinary technical and
integration
management processes for integrating
human considerations within and
across all system elements; an essential
enabler to SE practice
Domain
scoping

Interface

Integration
definition for
functional
modeling
(IDEF)

IPO diagram

Life cycle cost
(LCC)

Life cycle
model

Measures of
effectiveness

263

A shared boundary between two
functional units, defined by functional
characteristics, common physical
interconnection characteristics, signal
characteristics, or other characteristics,
as appropriate (ISO 2382‐1)
A family of modeling languages in the
fields of systems and software engineer­
ing that provide a multiple‐page (view)
model of a system that depicts functions
and information or product flow. Boxes
illustrate functions and arrows illustrate
information and product flow (KBS,
2010). Alphanumeric coding is used to
denote the view:
• IDEF0—functional modeling
method
• IDEF1—information modeling method
• IDEF1X—data modeling method
• IDEF3—process description capture
method
• IDEF4—object‐oriented design method
• IDEF5—ontology description capture
method
Figures in this handbook that provide
a high‐level view of the process of
interest. The diagram summarizes the
process activities and their inputs and
outputs from/to external actors; some
inputs are categorized as controls
and enablers. A control governs the
accomplishments of the process; an
enabler is the means by which the
process is performed
The total cost of acquisition and
ownership of a system over its entire
life. It includes all costs associated with
the system and its use in the concept,
development, production, utilization,
support, and retirement stages
A framework of processes and
activities concerned with the life cycle,
which also acts as a common reference
for communication and understanding
Measures that define the information
needs of the decision makers with
respect to system effectiveness to meet
operational expectations

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

264

Appendix C: Terms and Definitions

Measures of
performance

Measures that define the key
performance characteristics the system
should have when fielded and operated
in its intended operating environment

N2 diagrams

Graphical representation used to define
the internal operational relationships
or external interfaces of the SOI

Operator

An individual who, or an organization
that, contributes to the functionality of a
system and draws on knowledge, skills,
and procedures to contribute the function

Organization

Person or a group of people and facilities
with an arrangement of responsibilities,
authorities, and relationships (adapted
from ISO 9001:2008)

Performance

A quantitative measure characterizing
a physical or functional attribute
relating to the execution of a process,
function, activity, or task; performance
attributes include quantity (how many
or how much), quality (how well),
timeliness (how responsive, how
frequent), and readiness (when, under
which circumstances)

Physical
configuration
audit

An evaluation to ensure that the
operational system or product conforms
to the operational and configuration
documentation (adapted from ISO/IEC/
IEEE 15288)

Process

A set of interrelated or interacting
activities that transforms inputs into
outputs (adapted from ISO 9001:2008)

Product line

1. Group of products or services sharing
a common, managed set of features
that satisfy specific needs of a
selected market or mission. ISO/
IEC/IEEE 24765 (2010), Systems
and software engineering vocabulary
2. A collection of systems that are
potentially derivable from a single‐
domain
architecture.
IEEE
1517‐1999 (R2004) IEEE standard
for information technology—
Software life cycle processes—
Reuse processes (3.14) (ISO/IEC
FCD 24765.5)

Product line
scoping

Project

Proof of
concept
Prototype

Qualification
limit

Requirement

Resource
Return on
investment

Defines the products that will
constitute the product line and the
major (externally visible) common and
variable features among the products,
analyzes the products from an
economic point of view, and controls
and schedules the development,
production, and marketing of the
product line and its products. Product
management is primarily responsible
for this process (ISO 26550 2nd CD)
An endeavor with defined start and
finish criteria undertaken to create a
product or service in accordance with
specified resources and requirements
A naïve realization of an idea or
technology to demonstrate its feasibility
A production‐ready demonstration model
developed under engineering supervision
that is specification compliant and
represents what manufacturing should
replicate
Proving that the design will survive in its
intended environment with margin. The
process includes testing and analyzing
hardware and software configuration
items to prove that the design will
survive the anticipated accumulation
of acceptance test environments,
plus its expected handling, storage,
and operational environments, plus a
specified qualification margin
A statement that identifies a system,
product, or process characteristic or
constraint, which is unambiguous, clear,
unique, consistent, stand‐alone (not
grouped), and verifiable, and is deemed
necessary for stakeholder acceptability
An asset that is utilized or consumed
during the execution of a process
Ratio of revenue from output (product
or service) to development and
production costs, which determines
whether an organization benefits
from performing an action to produce
something (ISO/IEC 24765.5 FCD;
ISO/IEC/IEEE 24765, 2010)

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Appendix C: Terms and Definitions

1. The use of an asset in the solution
of different problems. [IEEE
1517‐1999 (R2004)]
2. Building a software system at least
partly from existing pieces to per­
form a new application. [ISO/IEC/
IEEE 24765 (2010)]
Specialty
Analysis of specific features of a
engineering
system that requires special skills to
identify requirements and assess their
impact on the system life cycle
Stage
A period within the life cycle of an
entity that relates to the state of its
description or realization
Stakeholder
A party having a right, share, or claim
in a system or in its possession of
characteristics that meet that party’s
needs and expectations
Supplier
An organization or an individual that
enters into an agreement with the
acquirer for the supply of a product or
service
System
An integrated set of elements, sub­
systems, or assemblies that accomplish
a defined objective. These elements
include products (hardware, software,
firmware), processes, people, informa­
tion, techniques, facilities, services,
and other support elements (INCOSE)
A combination of interacting elements
organized to achieve one or more stated
purposes (ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288)
System element Member of a set of elements that
constitutes a system
System life
The evolution with time of a SOI from
cycle
conception to retirement
System of
The system whose life cycle is under
interest
consideration
System of
A SOI whose system elements are
systems
themselves systems; typically, these
entail large‐scale interdisciplinary
problems with multiple, heterogeneous,
distributed systems
Reuse

Systems
engineering

Systems
engineering
effort

Systems
engineering
management
plan (SEMP)

Tailoring

Technical
performance
measures

265

Systems engineering (SE) is an
interdisciplinary approach and means
to enable the realization of successful
systems. It focuses on defining customer
needs and required functionality early
in the development cycle, document­ing
requirements, and then proceeding with
design synthesis and system validation
while considering the complete
problem: operations, cost and schedule,
performance, training and support,
test, manufacturing, and disposal. SE
considers both the business and the
technical needs of all customers with
the goal of providing a quality product
that meets the user needs (INCOSE)
Systems engineering effort integrates
multiple disciplines and specialty
groups into a set of activities that
proceed from concept to production
and to operation. SE considers both the
business and the technical needs of all
stakeholders with the goal of providing
a quality system that meets their needs
Structured information describing how
the systems engineering effort, in the
form of tailored processes and activities,
for one or more life cycle stages, will
be managed and conducted in the
organization for the actual project
The manner in which any selected issue
is addressed in a particular project.
Tailoring may be applied to various
aspects of the project, including
project documentation, processes
and activities performed in each life
cycle stage, the time and scope of
reviews, analysis, and decision making
consistent with all applicable statutory
requirements
Measures that define attributes of a
system element to determine how well
a system or system element is satisfying
or expected to satisfy a technical
requirement or goal

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

266

Appendix C: Terms and Definitions

Trade‐off

User
Validation

Value

Decision‐making actions that select
from various requirements and
alternative solutions on the basis of net
benefit to the stakeholders
Individual who or group that benefits
from a system during its utilization
Confirmation, through the provision
of objective evidence, that the
requirements for a specific intended
use or application have been fulfilled
(ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288)
Note: Validation is the set of activities
ensuring and gaining confidence that
a system is able to accomplish its
intended use, goals, and objectives
(i.e., meet stakeholder requirements) in
the intended operational environment
A measure of worth (e.g., benefit
divided by cost) of a specific product
or service by a customer, and
potentially other stakeholders and is a
function of (i) the product’s usefulness
in satisfying a customer need, (ii) the
relative importance of the need being
satisfied, (iii) the availability of the
product relative to when it is needed,
and (iv) the cost of ownership to the
customer (McManus, 2004)

Variability

Variability
constraints

Verification

Waste

Of a product line refers to characteristics
that may differ among members of the
product line (ISO 26550 2nd CD)
Denotes
constraint
relationships
between a variant and a variation point,
between two variants, and between two
variation points (ISO 26550 2nd CD)
Confirmation, through the provision
of objective evidence, that specified
requirements have been fulfilled (ISO/
IEC/IEEE 15288)
Note: Verification is a set of activities
that compares a system or system
element
against
the
required
characteristics. This may include,
but is not limited to, specified
requirements, design description, and
the system itself
Work that adds no value to the product
or service in the eyes of the customer
(Womack and Jones, 1996)

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Appendix D: N2 Diagram of Systems
Engineering Processes

Figure D.1 illustrates the input/output relationships between the various SE processes presented in the handbook and shows the interactions depicted on the IPO
diagrams throughout this handbook. The primary flows
represent a typical system development program.
The individual processes are placed on the diagonal
by abbreviation to the process names, as follows:
EXT
BMA
SNRD

External inputs and outputs
Business or mission analysis
Stakeholder needs and requirements
definition
SRD
System requirements definition
AD
Architecture definition
DD
Design definition
SA
System analysis
IMPL
Implementation
INT
Integration
VER
Verification
TRAN Transition
VAL
Validation
OPER
Operation
MAINT Maintenance

DISP
PP
PAC
DM
RM
CM
INFOM
MEAS
QA
ACQ
SUP
LCMM
INFRAM
PM
HRM
QM
KM
TLR

Disposal
Project planning
Project assessment and control
Decision management
Risk management
Configuration management
Information management
Measurement
Quality assurance
Acquisition
Supply
Life cycle model management
Infrastructure management
Portfolio management
Human resource management
Quality management
Knowledge management
Tailoring

The off‐diagonal squares represent the inputs/outputs
interface shared by the processes that intersect at a given
square. Outputs flow horizontally; inputs flow vertically
and can be read in a clockwise fashion.

INCOSE Systems Engineering Handbook: A Guide for System Life Cycle Processes and Activities, Fourth Edition.
Edited by David D. Walden, Garry J. Roedler, Kevin J. Forsberg, R. Douglas Hamelin and Thomas M. Shortell.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

267

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

268

Appendix D: N2 Diagram of Systems Engineering Processes

Note 1: The absence of an x in an intersection does
not preclude tailoring to create a relationship between
any two processes.

EXT

X

X

BMA

X

X

SNRD

Note 2: This is the result of one possible instance of
the life cycle processes. Other instances of the process
relationships are possible.

X
X
X

X

X

X

SRD

X

X

X

X

AD

X

X

X

DD

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X

SA
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

IMPL

X
INT

X

X

X

X
VER

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

TRAN

X

X

X

VAL

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

OPER

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

MAINT

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

DISP

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

PP

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

PAC

X

X

X

X

X

X

DM

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

RM

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

CM

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

INFOM

X

X

X

X

X

X

X MEAS

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X
X
X

X

X
X

X

X
X

X
QA

X
SUP

X

X
X

LCMM

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

PM

X

X
X

HRM

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X

X
X

X

X

X

INFRAM

X

X
X

ACQ

X

X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

QM

X

X

KM
TLR

Figure D.1 Input/output relationships between the various SE processes. INCOSE SEH original figure created by David
Walden. Usage per the INCOSE Notices page. All other rights reserved.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Appendix E: Input/Output Descriptions

Combined list of all inputs and outputs defined in the processes described in Chapters 4–8.

Accepted
system or
system
element
Acquired
system

Acquisition
agreement

System element or system is
transferred from supplier to acquirer
and the product or service is available
to the project
The system or system element (product
or service) is delivered to the acquirer
from a supplier consistent with the
delivery conditions of the acquisition
agreement
An understanding of the relationship
and commitments between the
project organization and the supplier.
The agreement can vary from
formal contracts to less formal
interorganizational
work
orders.
Formal agreements typically include
terms and conditions

Acquisition
need

Acquisition
payment
Acquisition
record
Acquisition
reply
Acquisition
report

The identification of a need that
cannot be met within the organization
encountering the need or a need that
can be met in a more economical way
by a supplier
Payments or other compensations
for the acquired system. Includes
remitting and acknowledgement
Permanent, readable form of data,
information, or knowledge related to
acquisition
The responses of one or more candidate
suppliers in response to a request for
supply
An account prepared for interested
parties in order to communicate the
status, results, and outcomes of the
acquisition activities

INCOSE Systems Engineering Handbook: A Guide for System Life Cycle Processes and Activities, Fourth Edition.
Edited by David D. Walden, Garry J. Roedler, Kevin J. Forsberg, R. Douglas Hamelin and Thomas M. Shortell.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

269

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

270

Appendix E: Input/Output Descriptions

Acquisition
strategy

Agreements

Alternative
solution
classes
Analysis
situations

Applicable
laws and
regulations
Architecture
definition
record
Architecture
definition
strategy
Architecture
traceability
Business or
mission
analysis
record
Business or
mission
analysis
strategy

Approaches, schedules, resources,
and specific considerations required
to acquire system elements. May also
include inputs to determine acquisition
constraints
Agreements from all applicable life
cycle processes, including acquisition
agreements and supply agreements
Identifies and describes the classes of
solutions that may address the problem
or opportunity
The context information for the analysis
including life cycle stage, evaluation
drivers, cost drivers, size drivers, team
characteristics, project priorities, or
other characterization information and
parameters that are needed to understand
analysis and represent the element
being analyzed. Relevant information
from the process that invokes the
analysis. Any existing models related to
the element being analyzed. Any data
related to the element being analyzed,
including historical, current, and
projected data. Can originate from any
life cycle process
International, national, or local laws or
regulations

Business
requirements

Permanent, readable form of data,
information, or knowledge related to
architecture definition
Approaches, schedules, resources, and
specific considerations required to
define the selected system architecture
that satisfies the requirements
Bidirectional traceability of the
architecture characteristics
Permanent, readable form of data,
information, or knowledge related to
business or mission analysis

Concept of
operations
(ConOps)

Approaches, schedules, resources,
and specific considerations required
to conduct business or mission
analysis and ensure business needs
are elaborated and formalized into
business requirements

Business
requirements
traceability
Candidate
configuration
items (CIs)
Candidate
information
items
Candidate
risks and
opportunities

Configuration
baselines

Configuration
management
record

Definition of the business framework
within which stakeholders will
define their requirements. Business
requirements govern the project,
including agreement constraints,
quality standards, and cost and
schedule
constraints.
Business
requirements may be captured in a
Business Requirements Specification
(BRS), which is approved by the
business leadership
Note: Business requirements may not
always be formally captured in the
system life cycle
Bidirectional traceability of the business
requirements
Items for configuration control. Can
originate from any life cycle process
Items for information control. Can
originate from any life cycle process
Risks and opportunities that arise
from any stakeholder. In many cases,
risk situations are identified during
the project assessment and control
process. Can originate from any life
cycle process
The ConOps is a verbal and/or
graphic statement prepared for
the organization’s leadership that
describes the assumptions or intent
regarding the overall operation or
series of operations of the enterprise,
to include any new capability (ANSI/
AIAA, 2012; ISO/IEC/IEEE 29148,
2011)
Items placed under formal change
control. The required configuration
baseline documentation is developed
and approved in a timely manner to
support required systems engineering
(SE) technical reviews, the system’s
acquisition and support strategies, and
production
Permanent, readable form of data,
information, or knowledge related to
configuration management

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Appendix E: Input/Output Descriptions

Configuration
management
report

Configuration
management
strategy

Customer
satisfaction
inputs
Decision
management
strategy
Decision
record
Decision
report

An account prepared for interested
parties in order to communicate the
status, results, and outcomes of the
configuration management activities.
Documents the impact to any process,
organization, decision (including
any required change notification),
products, and services affected by a
given change request
Approaches, schedules, resources,
and specific considerations required
to perform configuration management
for a project. Describes and documents
how to make authorized changes to
established baselines in a uniform and
controlled manner
Responses to customer satisfaction
surveys or other instruments
Approaches, schedules, resources,
and specific considerations required
to perform decision management for
a project
Permanent, readable form of data,
information, or knowledge related to
decision management
An account prepared for interested
parties in order to communicate the
status, results, and outcomes of the
decision
management
activities.
Should include a recommended course
of action, an associated implementation
plan, and key findings through effective
trade space visualizations underpinned
by defendable rationale grounded in
analysis results that are repeatable
and traceable. As decision makers
seek to understand root causes of top‐
level observations and build their own
understanding of the trade‐offs, the
ability to rapidly drill down from top‐
level trade space visualizations into
lower‐level analyses supporting the
synthesized view is often beneficial

271

Decisions related to decision gates
are taken on a prearranged schedule;
other requests for a decision may
arise from any stakeholder, and initial
information can be little more than
broad statements of the situation. Can
originate from any life cycle process
Permanent, readable form of data,
Design
definition
information, or knowledge related to
record
design definition
Design
Approaches, schedules, resources,
definition
and specific considerations required
strategy
to define the system design that
is consistent with the selected
system architecture and satisfies the
requirements
Design
Bidirectional traceability of the design
traceability
characteristics, the design enablers,
and the system element requirements
Disposal
Any constraints on the system
constraints
arising from the disposal strategy
including cost, schedule, and technical
constraints
Disposal
Requirements for any systems needed
enabling system to enable disposal of the system of
requirements
interest
Disposal
A disposal procedure that includes a
procedure
set of disposal actions, using specific
disposal techniques, performed with
specific disposal enablers
Disposal
Permanent, readable form of data,
record
information, or knowledge related to
disposal
Disposal
An account prepared for interested
report
parties in order to communicate the
status, results, and outcomes of the
disposal activities. May include an
inventory of system elements for
reuse/storage and any documentation
or reporting required by regulation or
organization standards
Disposal
Approaches, schedules, resources, and
strategy
specific considerations required to
ensure the system or system elements
are deactivated, disassembled, and
removed from operations
Decision
situation

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

272

Appendix E: Input/Output Descriptions

Disposed system that has been
deactivated,
disassembled,
and
removed from operations
Documentation Defines the hierarchical representation
tree
of the set of system definition products
for the system under development. Based
on the evolving system architecture
Enabling
Enabling system requirements from
system
all applicable life cycle processes,
requirements
including implementation enabling
system
requirements,
integration
enabling system requirements, verifica­
tion enabling system requirements,
transition enabling system requirements,
validation enabling system require­
ments, operation enabling system
requirements, maintenance enabling
system requirements, and disposal
enabling system requirements
Final list of requirements, their
Final
Requirements
verification attributes, and their traces.
Verification and Includes any proposed changes to
Traceability
the system requirements due to the
Matrix (RVTM) verification actions
Human resource Approaches, schedules, resources,
management
and specific considerations required
plan
to identify the skill needs of the
organization and projects. Includes the
organizational training plan needed
to develop internal personnel and the
acquisition of external personnel
Human resource Permanent, readable form of data,
management
information, or knowledge related to
record
human resource management
Human resource An account prepared for interested
management
parties in order to communicate the
report
status, results, and outcomes of the
human resource management activities
Implementation Any constraints on the system arising
constraints
from the implementation strategy
including cost, schedule, and technical
constraints

Disposed
system

Requirements for any systems needed
to enable implementation of the
system of interest
Permanent, readable form of data,
information, or knowledge related to
implementation
Implementation An account prepared for interested
report
parties in order to communicate the
status, results, and outcomes of the
implementation activities
Implementation Approaches, schedules, resources,
strategy
and specific considerations required
to realize system elements to satisfy
system requirements, architecture, and
design
Implementation Bidirectional traceability of the system
traceability
elements
Information
Permanent, readable form of data,
management
information, or knowledge related to
record
information management
Information
An account prepared for interested
management
parties in order to communicate the
report
status, results, and outcomes of the
information management activities
Information
Approaches, schedules, resources, and
management
specific considerations required to
strategy
perform information management for
a project
Information
A repository that supports the
repository
availability for use and communication
of all relevant project information
artifacts in a timely, complete, valid,
and, if required, restricted manner
Infrastructure
Approaches, schedules, resources, and
management
specific considerations required to
plan
define and sustain the organizational
and project infrastructures
Infrastructure
Permanent, readable form of data,
management
information, or knowledge related to
record
infrastructure management
Implementation
enabling system
requirements
Implementation
record

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Appendix E: Input/Output Descriptions

Infrastructure
management
report

Initial RVTM

Installation
procedure

Installed
system
Integrated
system or
system element

An account prepared for interested
parties in order to communicate the
status, results, and outcomes of the
infrastructure management activities.
Includes cost, usage, downtime/
response measures, etc. These can be
used to support capacity planning for
upcoming projects
A preliminary list of requirements,
their verification attributes, and their
traces
An installation procedure that includes a
set of installation actions, using specific
installation techniques, performed with
specific transition enablers
Installed system ready for validation

Integrated system element or system
ready for verification. The resulting
aggregation of assembled system
elements
Integration
Any constraint on the system
constraints
arising from the integration strategy
including cost, schedule, and technical
constraints
Integration
Requirements for any systems needed
enabling system to enable integration of the system of
requirements
interest
Integration
An assembly procedure that groups
procedure
a set of elementary assembly actions
to build an aggregate of implemented
system elements, using specific
integration techniques, performed
with specific integration enablers
Integration
Permanent, readable form of data,
record
information, or knowledge related to
integration
Integration
An account prepared for interested
report
parties in order to communicate
the status, results, and outcomes of
the integration activities. Includes
documentation of the integration
testing and analysis results, areas
of nonconformance, and validated
internal interfaces

Integration
strategy
Interface
definition

Interface
definition
update
identification
Knowledge
management
plan

Knowledge
management
report
Knowledge
management
system

273

Approaches, schedules, resources, and
specific considerations required to
integrate the system elements
The logical and physical aspects of
internal interfaces (between the system
elements composing the system)
and external interfaces (between the
system elements and the elements
outside the system of interest)
Identification of updates to interface
requirements and definitions, if any

Establishes how the organization
and projects within the organization
will interact to ensure the right level
of knowledge is captured to provide
useful knowledge assets. Includes
a list of applicable domains; plans
for obtaining and maintaining
knowledge assets for their useful life;
characterization of the types of assets
to be collected and maintained along
with a scheme to classify them for
the convenience of users; criteria for
accepting, qualifying, and retiring
knowledge assets; procedures for
controlling changes to the knowledge
assets; and definition of a mechanism
for knowledge asset storage and
retrieval
An account prepared for interested
parties in order to communicate the
status, results, and outcomes of the
knowledge management activities
Maintained knowledge management
system. Project suitability assessment
results for application of existing
knowledge. Lessons learned from
execution of the organizational SE
processes on projects. Should include
mechanisms to easily identify and
access the assets and to determine the
level of applicability for the project
considering its use. Can be used by
any life cycle process

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

274

Appendix E: Input/Output Descriptions

Articulation and refinement of the
various life cycle concepts consistent
with the business needs in the form
of life cycle concept documents
on which the system of interest is
based, assessed, and selected. The
architecture is based on these concepts,
and they are essential in providing
context for proper interpretation of the
system requirements. Typical concepts
include:
• Acquisition concept
• Deployment concept
• Operational concept (OpsCon)
• Support concept
• Retirement concept
Life cycle
Constraints from all applicable
life cycle processes, including
constraints
implementation
constraints,
integration constraints, verification
constraints, transition constraints,
validation
constraints,
operation
constraints, maintenance constraints,
and disposal constraints
Life cycle model Approaches, schedules, resources,
management
and specific considerations required
plan
to define a set of organizational life
cycle models. Includes identification
of new needs and the evaluation of
competitiveness from the perspective
of the organization strategy. Includes
criteria for assessments and approvals/
disapprovals
Life cycle model Permanent, readable form of data,
management
information, or knowledge related to
record
life cycle model management
Life cycle
An account prepared for interested
model
parties in order to communicate the
management
status, results, and outcomes of the life
report
cycle model management activities
Life cycle
Life cycle model or models appropriate
models
for the project. Includes definition of
the business and other decision‐making
criteria regarding entering and exiting
each life cycle stage. The information
and artifacts are collected and made
available to be used and reused

Life cycle
concepts

Any constraints on the system arising
from the maintenance strategy
including cost, schedule, and technical
constraints
Requirements for any systems needed
Maintenance
enabling system to enable operation of the system of
interest
requirements
Maintenance
A maintenance procedure that includes
procedure
a set of maintenance actions, using
specific maintenance techniques,
performed with specific maintenance
enablers
Maintenance
Permanent, readable form of data,
record
information, or knowledge related to
maintenance
Maintenance
An account prepared for interested
report
parties in order to communicate the
status, results, and outcomes of the
maintenance activities
Maintenance
Approaches, schedules, resources,
strategy
and specific considerations required
to perform corrective and preventive
maintenance in conformance with
operational availability requirements
Major
List of legitimate external and internal
stakeholder
stakeholders with an interest in the
identification
solution. Major stakeholders are also
derived from analysis of the ConOps
Measurement
Measurement data from all applicable
data
life cycle processes, including measure
of effectiveness (MOE) data, measure
of performance (MOP) data, technical
performance measures (TPM) data,
project
performance
measures
data, and organizational process
performance measures data
Measurement
Measurement needs from all applicable
needs
life cycle processes, including MOE
needs, MOP needs, TPM needs, project
performance measures needs, and
organizational process performance
measures needs
Measurement
Permanent, readable form of data,
record
information, or knowledge related to
measurement
Maintenance
constraints

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Appendix E: Input/Output Descriptions

Measurement
report

Measurement
repository

Measurement
strategy

MOE data
MOE needs

MOP data
MOP needs

Operation
constraints

An account prepared for interested
parties in order to communicate the
status, results, and outcomes of the
measurement activities. Includes
documentation of the measurement
activity results, the measurement
data that was collected and analyzed
and results that were communicated,
and any improvements or corrective
actions driven by the measures with
their supporting data
A repository that supports the
availability for use and communication
of all relevant measures in a timely,
complete, valid, and, if required,
confidential manner
Approaches, schedules, resources,
and specific considerations required
to perform measurement for a
project. Addresses the strategy for
performing measurement: describing
measurement
goals,
identifying
information needs and applicable
measures, and defining performance
and evaluation methodologies
Data provided for the identified
measurement needs
Identification of the MOEs (Roedler
and Jones, 2006), which define the
information needs of the decision
makers with respect to system
effectiveness to meet operational
expectations
Data provided for the identified
measurement needs
Identification of the MOPs (Roedler
and Jones, 2006), which define the key
performance characteristics the system
should have when fielded and operated
in its intended operating environment
Any constraints on the system
arising from the operational strategy
including cost, schedule, and technical
constraints

Operation
enabling system
requirements
Operation
record
Operation
report

Operation
strategy
Operator/
maintainer
training
materials
Organization
infrastructure

275

Requirements for any systems needed
to enable operation of the system of
interest
Permanent, readable form of data,
information, or knowledge related to
operation
An account prepared for interested
parties in order to communicate the
status, results, and outcomes of the
operation activities
Approaches, schedules, resources, and
specific considerations required to
perform system operations
Training capabilities and documenta­
tion

Resources and services that support
the organization. Organizational‐level
facilities, personnel, and resources
for hardware fabrication, software
development, system implementation
and
integration,
verification,
validation, etc.
Organization
Specific requests for infrastructure
infrastructure
products or services from the
needs
organization, including commitments
to external stakeholders
Organization
Organizational‐related
lessons
lessons learned learned. Results from an evaluation
or observation of an implemented
corrective action that contributed to
improved performance or increased
capability. A lesson learned also results
from an evaluation or observation of a
positive finding that did not necessarily
require corrective action other than
sustainment
Organization
Organization business objectives,
portfolio
funding outlay and constraints,
direction and
ongoing research and development
constraints
(R&D), market tendencies, etc.,
including cost, schedule, and solution
constraints

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

276

Appendix E: Input/Output Descriptions

Organization
strategic plan
Organization
tailoring
strategy

Organizational
policies,
procedures,
and assets

Organizational
process
performance
measures data
Organizational
process
performance
measures
needs
Portfolio
management
plan
Portfolio
management
record
Portfolio
management
report
Preliminary
interface
definition

The overall organization strategy,
including the business mission or vision
and strategic goals and objectives
Approaches, schedules, resources, and
specific considerations required to
incorporate new or updated external
standards into the organization’s set of
standard life cycle processes
Items related to the organization’s
standard set of life cycle processes,
including guidelines and reporting
mechanisms. Organization process
guidelines in the form of organization
policies, procedures, and assets
for applying the system life cycle
processes and adapting them to meet
the needs of individual projects
(e.g., templates, checklists, forms).
Includes defining responsibilities,
accountability, and authority for all SE
processes within the organization
Data provided for the identified
measurement needs

Identification of the organizational
process performance measures, which
measure how well the organization is
satisfying it objectives
Approaches, schedules, resources, and
specific considerations required to
define a project portfolio
Permanent, readable form of data,
information, or knowledge related to
portfolio management
An account prepared for interested
parties in order to communicate the
status, results, and outcomes of the
portfolio management activities
The preliminary logical and physical
aspects of internal interfaces (between
the system elements composing
the system) and external interfaces
(between the system elements of the
system and the elements outside the
system of interest)

Preliminary life Preliminary articulation of the various
cycle concepts life cycle concepts consistent with
the business needs in the form of life
cycle concept documents on which the
system of interest is based, assessed,
and selected. The architecture is
based on these concepts, and they
are essential in providing context for
proper interpretation of the system
requirements. Typical concepts include:
• Acquisition concept
• Deployment concept
• OpsCon
• Support concept
• Retirement concept
Preliminary data provided for the
Preliminary
MOE data
identified measurement needs
Preliminary
Preliminary identification of the
MOE needs
MOEs (Roedler and Jones, 2006),
which define the information needs
of the decision makers with respect
to system effectiveness to meet
operational expectations
Preliminary
Preliminary data provided for the
TPM data
identified measurement needs
Preliminary
Preliminary identification of the
TPM needs
TPM (Roedler and Jones, 2006),
which measure attributes of a system
element to determine how well a
system or system element is satisfying
or expected to satisfy a technical
requirement or goal
Preliminary
The preliminary validation criteria
validation
(the measures to be assessed), who
criteria
will perform validation activities, and
the validation environments of the
system of interest
Description of the problem or
Problem or
opportunity. Should be derived from
opportunity
the organization strategy and provide
statement
enough detail to understand the gap or
new capability that is being considered
Procedures
Procedures from all applicable life
cycle processes, including integration
procedure, verification procedure,
installation procedure, validation
procedure, maintenance procedure,
and disposal procedure

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Appendix E: Input/Output Descriptions

Project
assessment
and control
record
Project
assessment
and control
strategy
Project budget

Project change
requests

Project
constraints

Project control
requests

Project
direction

Project human
resource needs
Project
infrastructure

Project
infrastructure
needs

Permanent, readable form of data,
information, or knowledge related to
project assessment and control
Approaches, schedules, resources, and
specific considerations required to
perform assessment and control for a
project
A prediction of the costs associated
with a particular project. Includes
labor, infrastructure, acquisition, and
enabling system costs along with
reserves for risk management
Requests to update any formal
baselines that have been established.
In many cases, the need for change
requests is identified during the project
assessment and control process. Can
originate from any life cycle process
Any constraints on the system arising
from the technical management
strategy including cost, schedule, and
technical constraints
Internal project directives based on
action required due to deviations from
the project plan. New directions are
communicated to both project team
and customer, when appropriate. If
assessments are associated with a
decision gate, a decision to proceed, or
not to proceed, is taken
Organizational direction to the project.
Includes sustainment of projects
meeting assessment criteria and
redirection or termination of projects
not meeting assessment criteria
Specific requests for human resources
needed by the project, including
commitments to external stakeholders
Resources and services that support
a project. Project‐level facilities,
personnel, and resources for hardware
fabrication, software development,
system implementation and integration,
verification, validation, etc.
Specific requests for infrastructure
products or services needed by the
project, including commitments to
external stakeholders

Project lessons
learned

Project
performance
measures data
Project
performance
measures
needs
Project
planning
record
Project
portfolio

Project
schedule

Project status
report

277

Project‐related lessons learned. Results
from an evaluation or observation of
an implemented corrective action that
contributed to improved performance
or increased capability. A lesson
learned also results from an evaluation
or observation of a positive finding that
did not necessarily require corrective
action other than sustainment (CJCS,
2012)
Data provided for the identified measure­
ment needs
Identification
of
the
project
performance measures, which measure
how well the project is satisfying it
objectives
Permanent, readable form of data,
information, or knowledge related to
project planning
The necessary information for all of the
organizations’ projects. The initiation
of new projects or the setting up of a
product line management approach.
Includes the project goals, resources,
budgets identified and allocated to the
projects, and clearly defined project
management
accountability
and
authorities
A linked list of a project’s milestones,
activities, and deliverables with
intended start and finish dates. May
include a top‐level milestone schedule
and multiple levels (also called tiers)
of schedules of increasing detail and
task descriptions with completion
criteria and work authorizations
An account prepared for interested
parties in order to communicate the
status, results, and outcomes of the
overall project activities. Includes
status on meeting the objectives set
out for the project, information on
the health and maturity of the project
work effort, status on project tailoring
and execution, and status on personnel
availability and effectiveness for the
project

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

278

Appendix E: Input/Output Descriptions

Approaches, schedules, resources,
and specific considerations required
to incorporate and tailor the
organization’s set of standard life
cycle processes for a given project
Quality
Actions taken when quality goals are
management
not achieved. Resulting from project‐
(QM) corrective related and process‐related reviews
actions
and audits
Qualified
The right people with the right skills
personnel
are assigned at the right time to projects
per their skill needs and timing
Quality
An account prepared for interested
assurance
parties in order to communicate
evaluation
evidence of whether the project’s
report
quality assurance activities are
effective. Includes the assessment
of all the project‐related process
and any suggested improvements or
necessary corrective actions. Provides
constructive input for improvements
to an organization’s life cycle model
implementation
Quality
The set of project quality assurance
assurance plan activities, tailored to the project,
designed to monitor development and
SE processes. Describes the quality
assurance organization and applicable
audit, evaluation, and monitoring
activities. This includes the set of
policies and procedures, including
specific methods and techniques that
apply to quality assurance practices
within the organization and within
individual projects. It also includes
quality objectives for processes
and systems that are measurable,
along with linkages to the assigned
accountability and authority for QM
within the organization. The plan also
references activities performed by
other organizations or functions that
are monitored or audited by the quality
assurance organization
Quality
Permanent, readable form of data,
assurance
information, or knowledge related to
record
quality assurance
Project
tailoring
strategy

Quality
assurance
report

Quality
management
evaluation
report

Quality
management
guidelines
Quality
management
plan

Quality
management
record
Quality
management
report

An account prepared for interested
parties in order to communicate the
status, results, and outcomes of the
quality assurance activities. Includes
information on deviations from
nominal conditions during the product
life cycle and actions to be taken when
quality assurance goals and objectives
are not achieved
An account prepared for interested
parties in order to communicate
evidence of whether the organization’s
QM activities are effective. Includes the
assessment of all the organizational‐
related process and any suggested
improvements or necessary corrective
actions. Provides constructive input
for improvements to an organization’s
life cycle model implementation
Guidelines for quality practices within
the organization, within individual
projects, and as part of the execution
of system life cycle processes
The overarching guidance that explains
the organization’s quality philosophy
and quality organization. Describes
the QM organization and applicable
audit, evaluation, and monitoring
activities. This includes the set of
policies and procedures, including
specific methods and techniques that
apply to QM practices within the
organization. It also includes quality
objectives for processes and systems
that are measurable, along with the
assigned accountability and authority
for QM within the organization. The
set of project QM activities form the
basis of the project quality assurance
Permanent, readable form of data,
information, or knowledge related to
QM
An account prepared for interested
parties in order to communicate the
status, results, and outcomes of the
QM activities. Includes the results of
any customer satisfaction surveys and
any issues that need to be addressed

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Appendix E: Input/Output Descriptions

Records

Reports

Request for
supply

Risk
management
strategy

Records from all applicable life cycle
processes, including business or
mission analysis record, stakeholder
needs and requirements definition
record, system requirements definition
record, architecture definition record,
design definition record, system
analysis
record,
implementation
record, integration record, verification
record, transition record, validation
record, operation record, maintenance
record, disposal record, project
planning record, project assessment
and control record, decision record,
risk record, configuration management
record, information management
record, measurement record, quality
assurance record, acquisition record,
supply record, life cycle model
management record, infrastructure
management
record,
portfolio
management record, human resource
management record, and QM record
Project reports from all applicable
life cycle processes, including system
analysis
report,
implementation
report, integration report, verification
report, transition report, validation
report, operation report, maintenance
report, disposal report, decision report,
risk report, configuration management
report, information management
report, measurement report, quality
assurance report, acquisition report,
and supply report (other reports go
to other process areas and are not
aggregated here)
A request to an external supplying
organization to propose a solution to meet
a need for a system element or system
(product or service). The organization
can identify candidate suppliers that
could meet this need. Inputs are received
from the project personnel in the
organization with the need
Approaches, schedules, resources, and
specific considerations required to
perform risk management for a project

Risk record

Risk report

SEMP

Source
documents

Stakeholder
needs

279

Permanent, readable form of data,
information, or knowledge related to
risk management
An account prepared for interested
parties in order to communicate the
status, results, and outcomes of the
risk management activities. The risks
are documented and communicated
along with rationale, assumptions,
treatment plans, and current status.
For selected risks, an action plan is
produced to direct the project team to
update the project plan and properly
respond to the risks. If appropriate,
change requests are generated to
mitigate technical risk. Risk profiles
and/or risk matrices summarize the
risks and contain the findings of the
risk management process
Systems engineering management plan.
The top‐level plan for managing the SE
effort. It defines how the project will be
organized, structured, and conducted
and how the total engineering process
will be controlled to provide a product
that satisfies stakeholder requirements.
Includes identification of required
technical reviews and their completion
criteria, methods for controlling changes,
risk and opportunity assessment and
methodology, and identification of other
technical plans and documentation to be
produced for the project
External documents relevant to the
particular stage of procurement activity
for the system of interest. Includes
the written directives embodied in
the source documents relevant to
organizational strategies and policies
Needs determined from communication
with external and internal stakeholders
in understanding their expectations,
needs, requirements, values, problems,
issues, and perceived risks and
opportunities

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

280

Appendix E: Input/Output Descriptions

Stakeholder
needs and
requirements
definition
record
Stakeholder
needs and
requirements
definition
strategy

Stakeholder
requirements

Stakeholder
requirements
traceability
Standards

Strategy
documents

Permanent, readable form of data,
information, or knowledge related to
stakeholder needs and requirements
definition
Approaches, schedules, resources, and
specific considerations required to
reflect consensus among the stakeholder
classes to establish a common set of
acceptable requirements. Includes the
approach to capture the stakeholder
needs, transform them into stakeholder
requirements, and manage them
through the life cycle
Requirements from various stake­
holders that will govern the project,
including required system capabilities,
functions, and/or services; quality
standards; system constraints; and cost
and schedule constraints. Stakeholder
requirements may be captured in the
Stakeholder Requirements Specifica­
tion (StRS)
Bidirectional traceability of the
stakeholder requirements
This handbook and relevant industry,
country, military, acquirer, and other
specifications and standards. Includes
new knowledge from industry‐
sponsored knowledge networks
Strategies for all applicable life
processes, including business or mission
analysis strategy, stakeholder needs
and requirements definition strategy,
system requirements definition strategy,
architecture definition strategy, design
definition strategy, system analysis
strategy, implementation strategy,
integra­tion strategy, verification strategy,
transition strategy, validation strategy,
operation strategy, maintenance strategy,
disposal strategy, project assessment and
control strategy, decision management
strategy, risk management strategy,
configuration management strategy,
tion management strategy,
informa­
measure­
ment strategy, acquisition
strategy, and supply strategy

The system or system element
(product or service) is delivered from
the supplier to the acquirer consistent
with the delivery conditions of the
supply agreement
Supply
An understanding of the relationship
agreement
and commitments between the
project
organization
and
the
acquirer. The agreement can vary
from formal contracts to less formal
interorganizational
work
orders.
Formal agreements typically include
terms and conditions
Supply
Payments or other compensations for
payment
the supplied system. Includes receipt
and acknowledgement
Supply
Permanent, readable form of data,
record
information, or knowledge related to
supply
Supply
An account prepared for interested
report
parties in order to communicate the
status, results, and outcomes of the
supply activities
Supply
The organization response to the
response
request for supply
Supply
Approaches, schedules, resources,
strategy
and specific considerations required
to identify candidate projects for
management consideration. May also
include inputs to determine supply
constraints. Should also include the
identification of potential acquirers
System analysis Permanent, readable form of data,
record
information, or knowledge related to
system analysis
System analysis An account prepared for interested
report
parties in order to communicate the
status, results, and outcomes of the
system analysis activities. Includes the
results of costs analysis, risks analysis,
effectiveness analysis, and other
critical characteristics analysis. Also
includes all models or simulations that
are developed for the analysis
System analysis Approaches,
schedules,
resources,
strategy
and specific considerations required to
accomplish the various analyses to be
carried out, including methods, procedures,
evaluation criteria, or parameters
Supplied
system

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Appendix E: Input/Output Descriptions

Description of the selected system
architecture, typically presented in
a set of architectural views (e.g.,
views from architecture frameworks),
models (e.g., logical and physical
models, although there are other kinds
of models that might be useful), and
architectural characteristics (e.g.,
physical dimensions, environment
resistance,
execution
efficiency,
operability, reliability, maintainability,
modularity, robustness, safeguard,
understandability, etc.) (ISO/IEC/
IEEE 42010, 2010). Architecturally
significant system elements are
identified and defined to some degree
in this artifact. (Other system elements
might need to be added during the
design definition process as the design
is fleshed out)
System
Rationale for architecture selection,
architecture
technological/technical
system
rationale
element selection, and allocation
between system requirements and
architectural entities (e.g., functions,
input/output flows, system elements,
physical interfaces, architectural
characteris­tics,
information/data
elements, containers, nodes, links,
communication resources)
System design Description of the selected system
description
design. System elements are identified
and defined
System design Rationale for design selection, system
element selection, and allocation
rationale
between system requirements and
system element. Includes rationale of
major selected implementation options
and enablers
System element Design characteristics description of
the system elements contained in the
descriptions
system; the description depends on
the implementation technology (e.g.,
data sheets, databases, documents,
exportable data files)
System
architecture
description

281

System element Detailed drawings, codes, and
documentation material
specifications.
Updated
design documentation, as required by
corrective action or adaptations caused
by acquisition or conformance to
regulations
System
System elements implemented or
elements
supplied according to the acquisition
agreement
System function Definition of the functional boundaries
definition
of the system and the functions the
system must perform
System function Identification of the system functions
identification
System
Identification and documentation of
functional
the functional interfaces with systems
external to the boundaries and the
interface
corresponding information exchange
identification
requirements
System
What the system needs to do, how well,
requirements
and under what conditions, as required
to meet project and design constraints.
Includes types of requirements such
as functional, performance, interface,
behavior (e.g., states and modes,
stimulus responses, fault and failure
handling), operational conditions
(e.g., safety, dependability, human
factors, environmental conditions),
transportation,
storage,
physical
constraints, realization, integration,
verification, validation, production,
maintenance, disposal constraints, and
regulation. System requirements may
be captured in a document called the
System Requirements Specification
(SyRS) or just System Specification.
This includes the requirements at any
level in the system hierarchy
System
Permanent, readable form of data,
requirements
information, or knowledge related to
definition
system requirements definition
record

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

282

Appendix E: Input/Output Descriptions

System
requirements
definition
strategy
System
requirements
traceability
TPM data
TPM needs

Trained
operators and
maintainers
Transition
constraints

Approaches, techniques, resources,
and specific considerations required
to be used to identify and define the
system requirements and manage the
requirements through the life cycle
Bidirectional traceability of the system
requirements
Data provided for the identified
measurement needs
Identification of the TPM, which
measure attributes of a system element
to determine how well a system or
system element is satisfying or expected
to satisfy a technical requirement or
goal
Trained humans that will operate and
maintain the system

Any constraints on the system arising
from the transition strategy including
cost, schedule, and technical constraints
Transition
Requirements for any systems needed
enabling system to enable transition of the system of
requirements
interest
Transition
Permanent, readable form of data,
record
information, or knowledge related to
transition
Transition report An account prepared for interested
parties in order to communicate
the status, results, and outcomes of
the transition activities. Includes
documentation of the transition results
and a record of any recommended
corrective actions, such as limitations,
concessions, and ongoing issues.
Should also include plans to rectify any
problems that arise during transition
Transition
Approaches, schedules, resources, and
strategy
specific considerations required to
transition the systems into its operation
environment
Updated RVTM An updated list of requirements, their
verification attributes, and their traces
Validated
Confirmation that the various
requirements
requirements will satisfy the business
and stakeholder requirements

Validated system Validated system ready for supply and
operation. Also informs maintenance
and disposal
Validation
Any constraint on the system
constraints
arising from the validation strategy
including cost, schedule, and technical
constraints
Validation
The validation criteria (the measures
criteria
to be assessed), who will perform
validation activities, and the validation
environments of the system of interest
Requirements for any systems needed
Validation
enabling system to enable validation of the system of
interest
requirements
Validation
A validation procedure that includes a
procedure
set of validation actions, using specific
validation techniques, performed with
specific validation enablers
Validation
Permanent, readable form of data,
record
information, or knowledge related to
validation
Validation
An account prepared for interested
report
parties in order to communicate
the status, results, and outcomes of
the validation activities. Includes
validation results and the objective
evidence confirming that the system
satisfies its stakeholder requirements
and
business
requirements
or
not. Should also communicate an
assessment of the confidence level of
the findings or results
Validation
Approaches, schedules, resources,
strategy
and specific considerations required
to accomplish the selected validation
actions that minimize costs and
risks while maximizing operational
coverage of system behaviors
Verification
Any constraint on the system arising
constraints
from the verification strategy including
cost, schedule, and technical constraints
Verification
The
verification
criteria
(the
criteria
measures to be assessed), who will
perform verification activities, and
the verification environments of the
system of interest

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Appendix E: Input/Output Descriptions

Verification
enabling system
requirements
Verification
procedure

Verification
record
Verification
report

Requirements for any systems needed
to enable verification of the system of
interest
A verification procedure that includes
a set of verification actions, using a
specific verification method/technique,
performed with specific verification
enablers
Permanent, readable form of data,
information, or knowledge related to
verification
An account prepared for interested
parties in order to communicate
the status, results, and outcomes of
the verification activities. Includes
verification results and the objective
evidence confirming that the system
fulfills its requirements, architectural
characteristics, and design properties
or not. Should also communicate an
assessment of the confidence level of
the findings or results

Verification
strategy

Verified system
WBS

283

Approaches, schedules, resources,
and specific considerations required
to accomplish the selected verification
actions that minimize costs and
risks while maximizing operational
coverage of system behavior
Verified system (or system element)
ready for transition
The work breakdown structure is the
decomposition of a project into smaller
components and provides the necessary
framework for detailed cost estimating
and control. Includes a data dictionary.
The costs for and description of the
physical end products (hardware and
software) may be captured in a product
breakdown structure (PBS). The PBS
supports bottoms up and algorithmic
(parametric) cost estimating (see
10.1.3). The PBS is a key ingredient of
commercial cost estimating tools

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Appendix F: Acknowledgments

SEH v4 Contributions
The INCOSE Systems Engineering Handbook version 4
editorial team owes a debt of gratitude to all the contributors to prior editions (versions 1, 2, 2A, and 3). Tim
Robertson led the effort to create version 1 of the handbook. Version 2 was led by James Whalen (ESEP) and
Richard Wray (ESEP). Version 3 was led at various times
by Kevin Forsberg (ESEP), Terje Fossnes (ESEP),
Douglas Hamelin, Cecilia Haskins (ESEP), Michael
Krueger (ESEP), and David Walden (ESEP). The framework they provided gave a solid basis for moving ahead
with this version. This revision reflects changes to the
previous version based on three primary objectives: first,
to reflect the updated ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288:2015 standard; second, to reflect the state of the practice based on
inputs from the relevant INCOSE Working Groups
(WGs); and third, to be consistent with the Systems
Engineering Body of Knowledge (SEBoK) wherever
possible. Version 4 also corrected several minor issues
identified by the INCOSE community.
A great deal of effort and enthusiasm was provided by
the section leads and key authors, most of whom also
serve as INCOSE WG Chairs or SEBoK authors. We

acknowledge them in alphabetical order: Erik Aslaksen
(CSEP), Albertyn Barnard, Joe Bobinis, Barry Boehm,
Ed Casey, Dan Cernoch, Hugo Chale Gongora, Matthew
Cilli, John Clark (CSEP), Bjorn Cole, Judith Dahmann,
Arnold de Beer, Charles Dickerson, Rick Dove, Joe Elm
(ESEP), Tom Fairlie, Alain Faisandier, Gauthier Fanmuy,
Paul Frenz (CSEP), Sandy Friedenthal, Katri Hakola,
Alan Harding, Cecilia Haskins (ESEP), Mimi Heisey,
Eric Honour (CSEP), Scott Jackson, Ken Kepchar
(ESEP), Alain Kouassi, Gary Langford, Claude Laporte,
Alain LePut, Howard Lykins, Ray Madachy, James
Martin, Jen Narkevicius, Warren Naylor, Bohdan
Oppenheim, Ricardo Pineda, Paul Popick, Derek Price,
Melinda Reed, Kevin Robinson, Jean‐Claude Roussel
(ESEP), Mike Ryan, Frank Salvatore (CSEP), Hillary
Sillitto (ESEP), Jack Stein, Richard Swanson (ASEP),
Corrie Taljaard, Chris Unger, Beth Wilson (ESEP), and
Mark Wilson (ESEP).
The INCOSE Technical Operations review team
led by Quoc Do generated excellent comments that
­significantly improved the handbook. Other individual
reviewers also generated useful review comments. We
acknowledge them in alphabetical order: Aaron Chia,
Stephen Cook, Judith Dahmann, Bruce Douglass, Nick

INCOSE Systems Engineering Handbook: A Guide for System Life Cycle Processes and Activities, Fourth Edition.
Edited by David D. Walden, Garry J. Roedler, Kevin J. Forsberg, R. Douglas Hamelin and Thomas M. Shortell.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

284

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

SEH v4 Contributions

Dutton (ASEP), Jeff Grady (ESEP), Robert Halligan,
Alan Harding, Cecilia Haskins (ESEP), Ray Hentzschel,
Charles Homes, Rainer Ignetik, Vernon Ireland, Julian
Johnson (ASEP), Mario Kossmann (CSEP), Michael
Krueger (ESEP), Paul Logan, Bill Miller, Kevin Patrick,
Jack Ring, Steve Saunders, Paul Schreinemakers, David
Schultz, Zane Scott, Despina Tramoundanis, Joyce van
den Hoek Ostende, Charles Wilson (CSEP), and
Kenneth Zemrowski (ESEP). We would also like to
thank the certification beta exam participants and the
specific and anonymous reviewers who provided comments on v3.2, v3.2.1, and v3.2.2. Their inputs were
much appreciated.
The editors wish to acknowledge the Idaho National
Laboratory Systems Analysis Department for their
signifi­cant support of this update and thank them for

285

their contribution of technical editor Douglas Hamelin.
We also wish to acknowledge Lockheed Martin
Corporation for their significant support of this update
and thank them for their contribution of Thomas Shortell
(CSEP), who was the lead for the handbook figures and
the electronic versions. The editors wish to thank Vitech
Corporation for the use of their CORE tool, which was
used to create an underlying process model that helped
ensure consistency in the handbook IPO diagrams.
Any errors introduced as part of the editorial process
rest with the editors, not the contributors.
We apologize if we unintentionally omitted anyone
from these lists.
Gratefully, David Walden (ESEP), Garry Roedler
(ESEP), and Kevin Forsberg (ESEP).

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Appendix G: Comment Form
Reviewed document:

INCOSE SE Handbook v4.0

Name of submitter:

Given FAMILY (given name and family name)

Date submitted:

DD‐MMM‐YYYY

Contact info:

john.doe@anywhere.com (email address)

Type of submission:

Group (individual/group)

Group name and number of contributors:

INCOSE XYZ WG (if applicable)

Comments:

Detailed comments with reference to document
section, paragraph, etc. Please include detailed
recommendations, as shown in the table below
Send comments to info@incose.org

Comment ID Category
Section number
(TH, TL, E, G) (e.g., 3.4.2.1, no
alpha)

Specific
reference (e.g.,
paragraph, line,
figure, table)

Issue, comment,
and rationale
(rationale must
make comment
clearly evident
and supportable)

Proposed change/
new text—mandatory
entry (must be
substantial to increase
the odds of acceptance)

E, editorial; G, general; TH, technical high; TL, technical low.

INCOSE Systems Engineering Handbook: A Guide for System Life Cycle Processes and Activities, Fourth Edition.
Edited by David D. Walden, Garry J. Roedler, Kevin J. Forsberg, R. Douglas Hamelin and Thomas M. Shortell.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

286

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

index

acquirer, 13, 51, 88–93, 123–4, 134, 139–44, 261
acquisition, 2, 51, 54–5, 72, 98, 106, 139–42, 237, 241, 261,
267–8
affordability, 27, 30, 32, 64, 74, 98, 107, 134, 211–19
aggregate, 69, 80–82
agile, 27, 106, 110, 207–10, 261
agreement, 2, 139–44, 261, 269–70, 280
allocate/allocation, 29, 57–60, 66–72, 77, 124, 135, 150–155,
188, 190–196, 201, 224, 236, 238
analysis, 9–10, 18–19, 32, 41–2, 48–51, 54–5, 59–67, 72,
74–7, 86, 92, 98–101, 107–8, 112–13, 120, 132, 138,
164, 170–171, 195–9, 211–45
architecture, 6, 19, 30–31, 64–70, 81–2, 85, 92, 110, 159, 181,
190–199, 208–10, 261
architecture definition, 2, 33, 48, 64–70, 73, 182, 235–6, 267–8
assessment, 22, 70, 74, 108–10, 113, 135–8, 147–9, 152–8,
171, 202
associate systems engineering professional (ASEP), 23
attribute, 6, 60–63, 87, 113, 119, 173–4, 212–13, 230–231
audits, 77–9, 106, 109–10, 124–7, 129, 137–8, 148–9, 167,
200–2, 263, 264
availability, 96, 128–30, 226–9
baseline, 26–7, 34–8, 60, 64, 107, 122–7, 262, 270
behavioral architecture see functional architecture
benchmark, 148–9

black box, 6–7, 60–61, 194–6, 262
boundary, 6, 20, 44, 57, 59–60, 66, 73–4
brainstorming, 116, 118, 120, 202, 242–3
business or mission analysis, 2, 33, 47–52, 182, 267–8
business requirements, 33, 47–52, 182, 270
case studies, 39–46
certified systems engineering professional (CSEP), 23
change control, 34, 126–7, 186
commercial off-the-shelf (COTS), 10, 72, 79, 99, 161, 167,
237, 262
complexity, ix, 8–10, 12–14, 17–18, 21, 44, 127, 148, 165–70,
189, 221, 231
concept, 2, 5–8, 11, 13–14, 17–18, 20, 25–36, 38–46, 48–51,
53–8, 60–61, 64
documents, 13, 54–7, 99, 195, 274, 276
stage, 13, 25–31, 41–3, 45–6, 224
concept of operations (ConOps), 48, 50–51, 52, 270 see also
operational concept (OpsCon)
configuration control board (CCB), 124–6
configuration item (CI), 123–7, 262, 270
configuration management, 2, 27, 122–7, 267–8
consensus, 55, 165, 244, 280
constraint, 26, 49–50, 53–5, 58–62, 65–8, 71–2, 74–5, 77–80,
83–4, 90–91, 95–103, 105–7, 173, 215–16, 262, 266,
271–82

INCOSE Systems Engineering Handbook: A Guide for System Life Cycle Processes and Activities, Fourth Edition.
Edited by David D. Walden, Garry J. Roedler, Kevin J. Forsberg, R. Douglas Hamelin and Thomas M. Shortell.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

287

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

288

index

context, 6, 9–10, 13, 20–22, 47, 49–50, 55–7, 66–7, 74, 86–7,
104, 121, 139, 178, 182–3, 195, 198
contract(s)/subcontract(s), 41–2, 55, 61, 80, 84, 89, 96, 98, 101–2,
126, 130–131, 136–7, 139–40, 142–4, 215, 219, 269, 280
contractual, 84, 90, 114, 121, 124, 127, 169, 228
cost effectiveness, 107, 211–19
cost estimating, 168, 208, 217–19, 242–3
coupling, 196, 231
coupling matrix, 69, 81–2 see also N2 diagram
customer, 11, 22, 26, 34, 39, 47, 53–6, 60–61, 63, 95–9,
107–8, 121, 125–8, 133, 142–3, 147–8, 153, 156–8,
165, 170–175, 195, 204–8, 227, 237, 242–4 see also
stakeholder
decision gates, 25–9, 93, 106–8, 123–4, 130, 135, 142, 147,
153, 262
decision management, 2, 33, 67, 110–14, 164, 267–8
decisions, 7, 12–14, 21, 110–14, 130–135, 163–4, 200–201, 271
demonstration, 86
derivation, 63, 195–6, 201, 225, 241
derived requirement, 56, 59, 62–4, 66–7, 201, 213, 232,
238, 241, 262
design, 14, 60, 64, 73–4, 113, 134, 181–2, 209–10, 281
design definition, 2, 29, 31, 70–4, 267–8
design structure matrix (DSM), 199 see also N2 diagram
design to cost (DTC), 215, 219
development models, 32–9
development stage, 25–9, 31, 33, 93, 107, 224
disposal, 2, 14, 30, 32, 51, 101–3, 110, 124, 217–18, 220–221,
236, 267–8
documentation tree, 59, 272
domain, 6, 19, 49, 60, 73, 124, 152, 159–61, 165–71, 179,
184–6, 239–41, 262–3
effectiveness, 14–15, 22, 74–6, 98, 106–7, 109, 133, 147–9,
204, 213, 216
electromagnetic compatibility (EMC), 219–20
emergent properties/behaviors, 6, 9–10, 12, 20–21, 56, 64, 68,
73, 229–30
enabling system, 10–11, 27, 31, 49, 52, 59, 66, 72, 75, 78, 80, 84,
89, 91, 96, 98, 100–102, 106, 145, 198, 215, 236–7, 272
enterprise, 48, 69, 145, 175–9, 263 see also organization/
organizational
environment, 6, 10–11, 20–21, 40–42, 47, 49, 53–7, 60,
66–70, 87, 91, 96, 100–103, 125, 165–70, 218,
220–221, 223, 233, 240, 263
environmental engineering, 220–221
estimating, 119, 146, 168, 218, 226, 283
ethics, 23, 141, 143
evaluation criteria, 66–7, 75, 215
evolutionary development, 8, 36–7, 122, 196
expert systems engineering professional (ESEP), 24

failure modes, effects, and criticality analysis (FMECA), 101,
117, 224
family of systems (FoS), 159–61, 221 see also system of
systems (SoS)
flowdown, 60, 181, 193, 201
functional analysis, 107, 190–193, 201, 224, 242–3
functional architecture, 190–197
functional breakdown structure, 224
functional flow block diagram (FFBD), 56, 192, 198–9
functions-based systems engineering (FBSE), 190–193
gates see decision gate
hardware, 5, 20, 31, 53, 69, 78–9, 82, 126–7, 177, 182, 185,
194, 200
hazard, 231–4
hierarchy, 7–8, 32–3, 59, 61, 92, 173, 187, 192–3, 200,
228, 241
human resource management, 2, 154–6, 267–8
human systems integration (HSI), 237–41
ICWG/IFWG, 56, 198
IDEF, 192, 263
ilities see specialty engineering
implementation, 2, 70–74, 77–9, 267–8
INCOSE, iii, ix, vii, 5, 11–12, 23–4, 132, 206–7, 211–12,
284–6
incremental, 14, 32, 36–8, 64, 80–82, 101, 122, 182
incremental commit spiral model (ICSM), 36–8
information management, 2, 27, 128–30, 236, 267–8
infrastructure management, 2, 149–51, 267–8
inspection, 78, 86, 99, 109, 136–7, 223, 229
integrated product and process development
(IPPD), 199–204, 238
integrated product development team (IPDT), 78, 106, 155,
199–204, 239–41
integration, 2, 7, 9, 30–34, 69, 79–82, 87, 182, 185–6,
198–202, 213, 267–8
interface, 10, 20, 30–31, 47, 52–7, 59–63, 66–70, 72, 78–82,
94, 107, 133, 184, 191, 197–202, 209, 237, 263
interoperability, 68, 134, 175, 186, 221
ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288, vii–viii,1–4, 12–13, 29, 162
iteration, 28, 32–3, 35–6, 58, 60, 65, 191–2, 197, 201, 215
key performance parameters (KPPs), 134, 212, 215–16
knowledge management, 2, 158–61, 267–8
leadership, 9, 21–2, 51, 111, 133, 137
leading indicators, 132–3, 207
lean, 203–7
lessons learned, 105, 109, 116, 119, 142, 144, 146–9, 152,
159–61, 203, 207, 233, 273, 275, 277

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

Index

life cycle, 1–3, 13–14, 20, 25–39, 48–51, 54–7, 98, 104, 110,
121, 145–9, 181–2, 186, 199–203, 220–225, 227–8,
234–5
life cycle cost (LCC), 13–14, 62, 76, 95, 99, 107, 125,
211–19, 222–3, 229, 242, 263
life cycle model, 104–5, 145–9, 181–2, 186, 263, 274
life cycle model management, 2, 145–9, 267–8
logical architecture see functional architecture
logistics, 97–101, 222–5, 261
maintainability, 45–6, 97–101, 213, 222–9
maintainer, 31, 77, 88, 95, 97–8, 100, 182, 223, 237–41, 275,
282 see also stakeholder
maintenance, 2, 97–101, 110, 213, 222–5, 228–9, 236, 267–8
manufacturing, 225
margin, 70–71, 81, 94, 263–4
mass properties, 188, 225–6
measures/measurement, 2, 6, 110–13, 117, 127, 130–135,
149, 158, 193, 203, 208, 267–8
measures of effectiveness (MOEs), 54, 59, 74, 131, 133–4,
215, 263, 275–6
measures of performance (MOPs), 59, 74, 131, 133–4, 264,
275–6
measures of suitability (MOSs), 54, 59, 74
mission analysis see business or mission analysis
model, 66–70, 74–7, 180–189, 192–7, 224–5, 231
model-based systems engineering (MBSE), 189–97
N2 diagram, 69, 198–9, 264, 267–8
nondevelopmental item (NDI), 38, 72, 161 see also
commercial off-the-shelf (COTS)
object-oriented systems engineering method (OOSEM), 190,
193–7
operation, 2, 95–7, 267–8
operational concept (OpsCon), 30, 48–51, 55–7, 60, 64, 74,
79, 91–2, 96, 235, 274, 276 see also concept of
operations (ConOps)
operator, 6, 31, 40, 49, 52, 56, 69, 77, 86, 88–9, 92, 95–7, 99,
170, 181–2, 185, 223, 226–7, 229, 232, 233, 237–41,
264, 275, 282 see also stakeholder
opportunity, 49–52, 110, 114–22, 153, 177–8
organization/organizational, 36–39, 51, 88, 133, 137, 139–40,
145, 163–5, 176–8, 209, 264 see also enterprise
peer reviews, 76, 78, 86
performance, ix, 14–16, 59, 63–4, 96, 99–101, 108–10,
113, 134, 155, 174, 190–193, 212–17, 222–3,
239–41, 264
physical architecture, 64–70, 81, 195–6
physical breakdown structure, 69, 224
physical model, 66, 68, 75, 183–5, 188

289

planning, 21, 31–32, 104–8, 120, 178, 207, 223, 241
portfolio management, 2, 142, 144, 151–4, 177, 267–8, 277
process, ix, 1–4, 6, 11–14, 28, 38–9, 145–9, 162–5, 199–203,
205–7, 264
producibility, 225
product breakdown structure (PBS), 283
product line management (PLM), 19, 63, 68, 152–3, 160–161,
166, 170–172, 196–7, 262–4, 266
production stage, 28–9, 31, 110, 205–7, 218–19, 224, 225–6
professional development, 22–4, 175
project, ix, 27, 36–9, 47, 104–14, 151–4, 165, 264
project assessment and control, 2, 108–10, 267–8
project planning, 2, 104–8, 267–8
prototyping, 14–15, 30–31, 42–3, 45–6, 67, 70, 85, 101, 183,
197, 264
qualification (system), 94, 158, 166, 220, 264
qualification margin, 94, 264
qualification/qualified (person), 27, 91, 98, 154–6, 239, 278
quality assurance, 2, 135–8, 267–8
quality management, 2, 156–8, 267–8
recursion, 28, 32–3, 58 see also recursion
reliability, 98–101, 213, 226–9
requirements, 9–10, 28–31, 47–64, 83–7, 89–95, 124–7,
133–5, 139–44, 213, 219–20, 235, 262
requirements analysis, 59–64, 220
requirements verification and traceability matrix (RVTM), 84,
91, 272, 273, 282
resilience, 22, 229–31, 236
resource, 20, 79, 105–8, 118, 132, 149–51, 154–6, 176,
223, 264
retirement stage, 25–9, 32, 48, 51, 101–3, 110, 121, 159, 218,
224, 235, 274, 276
return on investment (ROI), 14–17, 22, 26, 170–172, 217,
245, 264
reviews, 26–7, 31, 76–8, 86, 93–4, 105–9, 124, 147–9, 153,
155, 164, 236, 239
risk, ix,13, 22, 25–7, 30, 33–8, 56, 59, 63, 70, 74–6, 82, 85,
104, 106, 108, 113, 114–22, 125, 132–5, 142–4, 153,
162–7, 169, 174–5, 179, 185, 189–90, 197–200, 207–8,
217, 225, 228, 231–7, 239–43, 270
risk management, 2, 33–8, 114–22, 267–8, 279
safety, 19, 39–40, 53, 121, 231–4, 240
scenario, 54, 56, 78, 94, 194–6, 235
security, 10, 19, 43–5, 128–30, 174, 234–7
sensitivity analysis, 112–13, 217
services, 1, 10, 20, 23, 32, 79, 171–5, 177
similarity, 86–7
simulation, 19, 70, 76, 78, 87, 113, 180–189, 192,
223–5, 238

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

290

index

software, 6, 19–20, 53, 69, 73, 79, 82, 85, 106, 177, 194–5,
200, 223, 228, 233, 262
specialty engineering, 211–45, 261
specification, 48, 52, 55, 57, 59, 64, 127, 141, 219–20, 224–5,
270, 280–281
spiral, 32, 36–8
stages, 13–14, 25–32, 93, 95, 121, 146, 162, 218, 224
stakeholder, 9, 22–23, 25, 27–8, 30–34, 36–8, 47–78, 85,
89–96, 106, 111–19, 128, 131–2, 142, 144, 147–8,
151–3, 156–9, 165, 170–178, 180–182, 189, 195–8, 265
needs and requirements definition, 2, 52–7, 267–8
requirements, 28–31, 48, 52–7, 89–95, 280
standards, 1, 12–13, 60, 93–4, 107, 146–9, 163–70, 186,
197–8, 210, 219, 221, 235
state, 6, 20–21, 96, 188, 192, 228, 230–231
supplier, 13, 93, 139–44, 165, 265
supply, 2, 142–4, 267–8
support stage, 25–9, 32, 48, 51, 56, 95, 97–101, 110, 123,
144, 218, 222–5, 228, 234, 274, 276
survivability, 240
SysML see Systems Modeling Language (SysML)
system(s), 1, 5–8, 25, 265
analysis, 2, 74–7, 267–8
element, 5–8, 10, 20, 48, 58, 64–74, 77–103, 110, 113,
122–7, 134–5, 140–141, 160–161, 177, 181–8, 192–6,
198–203, 219–22, 225–6, 231, 235–8, 265
engineer, ix, 4, 21–5, 29–30, 52, 54–5, 70, 104, 106–7, 112,
124, 130, 139, 159, 201, 216–17, 235
science, 17–21
thinking, 17–21
system of interest (SOI), 6–8, 10–11
system of systems (SoS), 8–10, 13, 36, 172, 215, 229
system requirements, 28–31, 48, 57–64, 83–7, 224, 235, 281
definition, 2, 57–64, 267–8
systems engineering (SE), ix, 1, 11–13, 25, 53, 265
systems engineering and integration team (SEIT), 200–203
systems engineering body of knowledge (SEBoK), guide to,
vii, 1, 12–13, 17, 19–20, 132, 176, 186, 284
systems engineering management plan (SEMP), 104–8, 135,
241, 265

systems engineering plan (SEP), 106 see also systems
engineering management plan (SEMP)
Systems Modeling Language (SysML), 187–8, 193–4, 199
tailoring, ix, 1–3, 25, 105–8, 110, 145–9, 158, 162–79, 196–7,
202–3, 265, 267–8
taxonomy, 160, 183–4, 219
team, 11, 21–2, 33, 36–9, 69, 78, 88, 106–10, 120, 155–6,
176–7, 199–204
technical performance measures (TPMs), 59, 74, 106–7,
131, 134–5, 265, 276, 282
test, 86
testing, 10, 78, 82, 85, 108, 120, 182, 227
tools, 38, 55–6, 66, 100, 148, 150–151, 173, 188, 192
traceability, 33, 50, 54, 56–60, 62, 64, 67, 72, 78, 80, 84, 89,
91–2, 96, 99, 114, 119, 126–7, 142, 187, 191–2, 195–6
trade study, 25, 107, 110–14, 120, 130, 212–4, 266
training, 22–3, 51, 77–9, 88–9, 96, 98, 100, 108, 120, 149,
151, 155, 159, 182, 202, 223, 233, 237, 239, 275
transition, 2, 88–9, 267–8
usability, 237–41
utilization stage, 25–9, 32, 88, 93, 95, 110, 121, 123, 218,
222–6, 228, 234
validation, 2, 21, 89–95, 267–8
value, 6, 13–17, 22, 36, 99, 103, 106, 111–14, 122, 132, 145–6,
170–178, 180, 204–8, 212–17, 221, 225, 241–5, 266
value engineering, 241–5
Vee model, 32–6, 81, 169, 193
verification, 2, 21, 27, 30–31, 33, 56–63, 69, 78, 81, 83–8,
267–8
very small and micro enterprises (VSME), 179
view, 6–8, 22, 28–9, 36, 48, 51, 55–7, 64–70, 72, 104, 117,
119, 175–6, 197, 199, 227, 262
waste, 27, 101–2, 131, 133, 159, 173–4, 204–7, 220–221, 266
white box, 6, 78, 194, 199, 262
work breakdown structure (WBS), 105–7, 109, 168, 216,
243, 283

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook EULA.

For INCOSE member, Corporate Advisory Board, and Academic Council use only.
Do not distribute.

